“I!” exclaimed Fauntleroy, and a flush overspread his forehead. “Will
it do if I write it? I don't always spell quite right when I haven't a
dictionary, and nobody tells me.”

“It will do,” answered the Earl. “Higgins will not complain of the
spelling. I'm not the philanthropist; you are. Dip your pen in the ink.”

Fauntleroy took up the pen and dipped it in the ink-bottle, then he
arranged himself in position, leaning on the table.

“Now,” he inquired, “what must I say?”

“You may say, 'Higgins is not to be interfered with, for the present,'
and sign it, 'Fauntleroy,'” said the Earl.

Fauntleroy dipped his pen in the ink again, and resting his arm, began
to write. It was rather a slow and serious process, but he gave his
whole soul to it. After a while, however, the manuscript was complete,
and he handed it to his grandfather with a smile slightly tinged with
anxiety.

“Do you think it will do?” he asked.

The Earl looked at it, and the corners of his mouth twitched a little.

“Yes,” he answered; “Higgins will find it entirely satisfactory.” And he
handed it to Mr. Mordaunt.

What Mr. Mordaunt found written was this:


“Dear mr. Newik if you pleas mr. higins is not to be intur feared with
for the present and oblige. Yours rispecferly,

“FAUNTLEROY.”


“Mr. Hobbs always signed his letters that way,” said Fauntleroy; “and I
thought I'd better say 'please.' Is that exactly the right way to spell
'interfered'?”

“It's not exactly the way it is spelled in the dictionary,” answered the
Earl.

“I was afraid of that,” said Fauntleroy. “I ought to have asked. You
see, that's the way with words of more than one syllable; you have to
look in the dictionary. It's always safest. I'll write it over again.”

And write it over again he did, making quite an imposing copy, and
taking precautions in the matter of spelling by consulting the Earl
himself.

“Spelling is a curious thing,” he said. “It's so often different
from what you expect it to be. I used to think 'please' was spelled
p-l-e-e-s, but it isn't, you know; and you'd think 'dear' was spelled
d-e-r-e, if you didn't inquire. Sometimes it almost discourages you.”

When Mr. Mordaunt went away, he took the letter with him, and he took
something else with him also--namely, a pleasanter feeling and a more
hopeful one than he had ever carried home with him down that avenue on
any previous visit he had made at Dorincourt Castle.

When he was gone, Fauntleroy, who had accompanied him to the door, went
back to his grandfather.

“May I go to Dearest now?” he asked. “I think she will be waiting for
me.”

The Earl was silent a moment.

“There is something in the stable for you to see first,” he said. “Ring
the bell.”

“If you please,” said Fauntleroy, with his quick little flush. “I'm very
much obliged; but I think I'd better see it to-morrow. She will be
expecting me all the time.”

“Very well,” answered the Earl. “We will order the carriage.” Then he
added dryly, “It's a pony.”

Fauntleroy drew a long breath.

“A pony!” he exclaimed. “Whose pony is it?”

“Yours,” replied the Earl.

“Mine?” cried the little fellow. “Mine--like the things upstairs?”

“Yes,” said his grandfather. “Would you like to see it? Shall I order it
to be brought around?”

Fauntleroy's cheeks grew redder and redder.

“I never thought I should have a pony!” he said. “I never thought that!
How glad Dearest will be. You give me EVERYthing, don't you?”

“Do you wish to see it?” inquired the Earl.

Fauntleroy drew a long breath. “I WANT to see it,” he said. “I want to
see it so much I can hardly wait. But I'm afraid there isn't time.”

“You MUST go and see your mother this afternoon?” asked the Earl. “You
think you can't put it off?”

“Why,” said Fauntleroy, “she has been thinking about me all the morning,
and I have been thinking about her!”

“Oh!” said the Earl. “You have, have you? Ring the bell.”

As they drove down the avenue, under the arching trees, he was rather
silent. But Fauntleroy was not. He talked about the pony. What color was
it? How big was it? What was its name? What did it like to eat best? How
old was it? How early in the morning might he get up and see it?

“Dearest will be so glad!” he kept saying. “She will be so much obliged
to you for being so kind to me! She knows I always liked ponies so much,
but we never thought I should have one. There was a little boy on Fifth
Avenue who had one, and he used to ride out every morning and we used to
take a walk past his house to see him.”

He leaned back against the cushions and regarded the Earl with rapt
interest for a few minutes and in entire silence.

“I think you must be the best person in the world,” he burst forth at
last. “You are always doing good, aren't you?--and thinking about other
people. Dearest says that is the best kind of goodness; not to think
about yourself, but to think about other people. That is just the way
you are, isn't it?”

His lordship was so dumfounded to find himself presented in such
agreeable colors, that he did not know exactly what to say. He felt that
he needed time for reflection. To see each of his ugly, selfish motives
changed into a good and generous one by the simplicity of a child was a
singular experience.

Fauntleroy went on, still regarding him with admiring eyes--those great,
clear, innocent eyes!

“You make so many people happy,” he said. “There's Michael and Bridget
and their ten children, and the apple-woman, and Dick, and Mr.
Hobbs, and Mr. Higgins and Mrs. Higgins and their children, and Mr.
Mordaunt,--because of course he was glad,--and Dearest and me, about
the pony and all the other things. Do you know, I've counted it up on
my fingers and in my mind, and it's twenty-seven people you've been kind
to. That's a good many--twenty-seven!”

“And I was the person who was kind to them--was I?” said the Earl.

“Why, yes, you know,” answered Fauntleroy. “You made them all happy.
Do you know,” with some delicate hesitation, “that people are sometimes
mistaken about earls when they don't know them. Mr. Hobbs was. I am
going to write him, and tell him about it.”

“What was Mr. Hobbs's opinion of earls?” asked his lordship.

“Well, you see, the difficulty was,” replied his young companion,
“that he didn't know any, and he'd only read about them in books. He
thought--you mustn't mind it--that they were gory tyrants; and he said
he wouldn't have them hanging around his store. But if he'd known YOU,
I'm sure he would have felt quite different. I shall tell him about
you.”

“What shall you tell him?”

“I shall tell him,” said Fauntleroy, glowing with enthusiasm, “that
you are the kindest man I ever heard of. And you are always thinking of
other people, and making them happy and--and I hope when I grow up, I
shall be just like you.”

“Just like me!” repeated his lordship, looking at the little kindling
face. And a dull red crept up under his withered skin, and he suddenly
turned his eyes away and looked out of the carriage window at the great
beech-trees, with the sun shining on their glossy, red-brown leaves.

“JUST like you,” said Fauntleroy, adding modestly, “if I can. Perhaps
I'm not good enough, but I'm going to try.”

The carriage rolled on down the stately avenue under the beautiful,
broad-branched trees, through the spaces of green shade and lanes of
golden sunlight. Fauntleroy saw again the lovely places where the ferns
grew high and the bluebells swayed in the breeze; he saw the deer,
standing or lying in the deep grass, turn their large, startled eyes as
the carriage passed, and caught glimpses of the brown rabbits as they
scurried away. He heard the whir of the partridges and the calls and
songs of the birds, and it all seemed even more beautiful to him than
before. All his heart was filled with pleasure and happiness in the
beauty that was on every side. But the old Earl saw and heard very
different things, though he was apparently looking out too. He saw
a long life, in which there had been neither generous deeds nor kind
thoughts; he saw years in which a man who had been young and strong and
rich and powerful had used his youth and strength and wealth and power
only to please himself and kill time as the days and years succeeded
each other; he saw this man, when the time had been killed and old age
had come, solitary and without real friends in the midst of all his
splendid wealth; he saw people who disliked or feared him, and people
who would flatter and cringe to him, but no one who really cared whether
he lived or died, unless they had something to gain or lose by it. He
looked out on the broad acres which belonged to him, and he knew what
Fauntleroy did not--how far they extended, what wealth they represented,
and how many people had homes on their soil. And he knew, too,--another
thing Fauntleroy did not,--that in all those homes, humble or
well-to-do, there was probably not one person, however much he envied
the wealth and stately name and power, and however willing he would have
been to possess them, who would for an instant have thought of calling
the noble owner “good,” or wishing, as this simple-souled little boy
had, to be like him.

And it was not exactly pleasant to reflect upon, even for a cynical,
worldly old man, who had been sufficient unto himself for seventy years
and who had never deigned to care what opinion the world held of him so
long as it did not interfere with his comfort or entertainment. And the
fact was, indeed, that he had never before condescended to reflect
upon it at all; and he only did so now because a child had believed
him better than he was, and by wishing to follow in his illustrious
footsteps and imitate his example, had suggested to him the curious
question whether he was exactly the person to take as a model.

Fauntleroy thought the Earl's foot must be hurting him, his brows
knitted themselves together so, as he looked out at the park; and
thinking this, the considerate little fellow tried not to disturb him,
and enjoyed the trees and the ferns and the deer in silence.

But at last the carriage, having passed the gates and bowled through the
green lanes for a short distance, stopped. They had reached Court Lodge;
and Fauntleroy was out upon the ground almost before the big footman had
time to open the carriage door.

The Earl wakened from his reverie with a start.

“What!” he said. “Are we here?”

“Yes,” said Fauntleroy. “Let me give you your stick. Just lean on me
when you get out.”

“I am not going to get out,” replied his lordship brusquely.

“Not--not to see Dearest?” exclaimed Fauntleroy with astonished face.

“'Dearest' will excuse me,” said the Earl dryly. “Go to her and tell her
that not even a new pony would keep you away.”

“She will be disappointed,” said Fauntleroy. “She will want to see you
very much.”

“I am afraid not,” was the answer. “The carriage will call for you as we
come back.--Tell Jeffries to drive on, Thomas.”

Thomas closed the carriage door; and, after a puzzled look, Fauntleroy
ran up the drive. The Earl had the opportunity--as Mr. Havisham once
had--of seeing a pair of handsome, strong little legs flash over the
ground with astonishing rapidity. Evidently their owner had no intention
of losing any time. The carriage rolled slowly away, but his lordship
did not at once lean back; he still looked out. Through a space in the
trees he could see the house door; it was wide open. The little figure
dashed up the steps; another figure--a little figure, too, slender and
young, in its black gown--ran to meet it. It seemed as if they flew
together, as Fauntleroy leaped into his mother's arms, hanging about her
neck and covering her sweet young face with kisses.




VII

On the following Sunday morning, Mr. Mordaunt had a large congregation.
Indeed, he could scarcely remember any Sunday on which the church had
been so crowded. People appeared upon the scene who seldom did him the
honor of coming to hear his sermons.

There were even people from Hazelton, which was the next parish. There
were hearty, sunburned farmers, stout, comfortable, apple-cheeked
wives in their best bonnets and most gorgeous shawls, and half a dozen
children or so to each family. The doctor's wife was there, with her
four daughters. Mrs. Kimsey and Mr. Kimsey, who kept the druggist's
shop, and made pills, and did up powders for everybody within ten
miles, sat in their pew; Mrs. Dibble in hers; Miss Smiff, the village
dressmaker, and her friend Miss Perkins, the milliner, sat in theirs;
the doctor's young man was present, and the druggist's apprentice; in
fact, almost every family on the county side was represented, in one way
or another.

In the course of the preceding week, many wonderful stories had been
told of little Lord Fauntleroy. Mrs. Dibble had been kept so busy
attending to customers who came in to buy a pennyworth of needles or
a ha'porth of tape and to hear what she had to relate, that the little
shop bell over the door had nearly tinkled itself to death over the
coming and going. Mrs. Dibble knew exactly how his small lordship's
rooms had been furnished for him, what expensive toys had been bought,
how there was a beautiful brown pony awaiting him, and a small groom to
attend it, and a little dog-cart, with silver-mounted harness. And she
could tell, too, what all the servants had said when they had caught
glimpses of the child on the night of his arrival; and how every female
below stairs had said it was a shame, so it was, to part the poor pretty
dear from his mother; and had all declared their hearts came into their
mouths when he went alone into the library to see his grandfather, for
“there was no knowing how he'd be treated, and his lordship's temper was
enough to fluster them with old heads on their shoulders, let alone a
child.”

“But if you'll believe me, Mrs. Jennifer, mum,” Mrs. Dibble had said,
“fear that child does not know--so Mr. Thomas hisself says; an' set an'
smile he did, an' talked to his lordship as if they'd been friends ever
since his first hour. An' the Earl so took aback, Mr. Thomas says, that
he couldn't do nothing but listen and stare from under his eyebrows. An'
it's Mr. Thomas's opinion, Mrs. Bates, mum, that bad as he is, he was
pleased in his secret soul, an' proud, too; for a handsomer little
fellow, or with better manners, though so old-fashioned, Mr. Thomas says
he'd never wish to see.”

And then there had come the story of Higgins. The Reverend Mr. Mordaunt
had told it at his own dinner table, and the servants who had heard it
had told it in the kitchen, and from there it had spread like wildfire.

And on market-day, when Higgins had appeared in town, he had been
questioned on every side, and Newick had been questioned too, and in
response had shown to two or three people the note signed “Fauntleroy.”

And so the farmers' wives had found plenty to talk of over their tea and
their shopping, and they had done the subject full justice and made the
most of it. And on Sunday they had either walked to church or had
been driven in their gigs by their husbands, who were perhaps a trifle
curious themselves about the new little lord who was to be in time the
owner of the soil.

It was by no means the Earl's habit to attend church, but he chose to
appear on this first Sunday--it was his whim to present himself in the
huge family pew, with Fauntleroy at his side.

There were many loiterers in the churchyard, and many lingerers in the
lane that morning. There were groups at the gates and in the porch, and
there had been much discussion as to whether my lord would really appear
or not. When this discussion was at its height, one good woman suddenly
uttered an exclamation.

“Eh,” she said, “that must be the mother, pretty young thing.” All who
heard turned and looked at the slender figure in black coming up the
path. The veil was thrown back from her face and they could see how fair
and sweet it was, and how the bright hair curled as softly as a child's
under the little widow's cap.

She was not thinking of the people about; she was thinking of Cedric,
and of his visits to her, and his joy over his new pony, on which he had
actually ridden to her door the day before, sitting very straight
and looking very proud and happy. But soon she could not help being
attracted by the fact that she was being looked at and that her arrival
had created some sort of sensation. She first noticed it because an old
woman in a red cloak made a bobbing courtesy to her, and then another
did the same thing and said, “God bless you, my lady!” and one man
after another took off his hat as she passed. For a moment she did not
understand, and then she realized that it was because she was little
Lord Fauntleroy's mother that they did so, and she flushed rather shyly
and smiled and bowed too, and said, “Thank you,” in a gentle voice to
the old woman who had blessed her. To a person who had always lived in
a bustling, crowded American city this simple deference was very novel,
and at first just a little embarrassing; but after all, she could not
help liking and being touched by the friendly warm-heartedness of which
it seemed to speak. She had scarcely passed through the stone porch into
the church before the great event of the day happened. The carriage from
the Castle, with its handsome horses and tall liveried servants, bowled
around the corner and down the green lane.

“Here they come!” went from one looker-on to another.

And then the carriage drew up, and Thomas stepped down and opened the
door, and a little boy, dressed in black velvet, and with a splendid mop
of bright waving hair, jumped out.

Every man, woman, and child looked curiously upon him.

“He's the Captain over again!” said those of the on-lookers who
remembered his father. “He's the Captain's self, to the life!”

He stood there in the sunlight looking up at the Earl, as Thomas helped
that nobleman out, with the most affectionate interest that could be
imagined. The instant he could help, he put out his hand and offered his
shoulder as if he had been seven feet high. It was plain enough to every
one that however it might be with other people, the Earl of Dorincourt
struck no terror into the breast of his grandson.

“Just lean on me,” they heard him say. “How glad the people are to see
you, and how well they all seem to know you!”

“Take off your cap, Fauntleroy,” said the Earl. “They are bowing to
you.”

“To me!” cried Fauntleroy, whipping off his cap in a moment, baring his
bright head to the crowd and turning shining, puzzled eyes on them as he
tried to bow to every one at once.

“God bless your lordship!” said the courtesying, red-cloaked old woman
who had spoken to his mother; “long life to you!”

“Thank you, ma'am,” said Fauntleroy. And then they went into the church,
and were looked at there, on their way up the aisle to the square,
red-cushioned and curtained pew. When Fauntleroy was fairly seated,
he made two discoveries which pleased him: the first that, across the
church where he could look at her, his mother sat and smiled at him; the
second, that at one end of the pew, against the wall, knelt two quaint
figures carven in stone, facing each other as they kneeled on either
side of a pillar supporting two stone missals, their pointed hands
folded as if in prayer, their dress very antique and strange. On the
tablet by them was written something of which he could only read the
curious words:

“Here lyeth ye bodye of Gregorye Arthure Fyrst Earle of Dorincourt
Allsoe of Alisone Hildegarde hys wyfe.”

“May I whisper?” inquired his lordship, devoured by curiosity.

“What is it?” said his grandfather.

“Who are they?”

“Some of your ancestors,” answered the Earl, “who lived a few hundred
years ago.”

“Perhaps,” said Lord Fauntleroy, regarding them with respect, “perhaps
I got my spelling from them.” And then he proceeded to find his place in
the church service. When the music began, he stood up and looked across
at his mother, smiling. He was very fond of music, and his mother and
he often sang together, so he joined in with the rest, his pure, sweet,
high voice rising as clear as the song of a bird. He quite forgot
himself in his pleasure in it. The Earl forgot himself a little too, as
he sat in his curtain-shielded corner of the pew and watched the boy.
Cedric stood with the big psalter open in his hands, singing with all
his childish might, his face a little uplifted, happily; and as he sang,
a long ray of sunshine crept in and, slanting through a golden pane of a
stained glass window, brightened the falling hair about his young head.
His mother, as she looked at him across the church, felt a thrill pass
through her heart, and a prayer rose in it too,--a prayer that the pure,
simple happiness of his childish soul might last, and that the strange,
great fortune which had fallen to him might bring no wrong or evil with
it. There were many soft, anxious thoughts in her tender heart in those
new days.

“Oh, Ceddie!” she had said to him the evening before, as she hung over
him in saying good-night, before he went away; “oh, Ceddie, dear, I wish
for your sake I was very clever and could say a great many wise things!
But only be good, dear, only be brave, only be kind and true always, and
then you will never hurt any one, so long as you live, and you may help
many, and the big world may be better because my little child was born.
And that is best of all, Ceddie,--it is better than everything else,
that the world should be a little better because a man has lived--even
ever so little better, dearest.”

And on his return to the Castle, Fauntleroy had repeated her words to
his grandfather.

“And I thought about you when she said that,” he ended; “and I told her
that was the way the world was because you had lived, and I was going to
try if I could be like you.”

“And what did she say to that?” asked his lordship, a trifle uneasily.

“She said that was right, and we must always look for good in people and
try to be like it.”

Perhaps it was this the old man remembered as he glanced through the
divided folds of the red curtain of his pew. Many times he looked over
the people's heads to where his son's wife sat alone, and he saw the
fair face the unforgiven dead had loved, and the eyes which were so like
those of the child at his side; but what his thoughts were, and whether
they were hard and bitter, or softened a little, it would have been hard
to discover.

As they came out of church, many of those who had attended the service
stood waiting to see them pass. As they neared the gate, a man who stood
with his hat in his hand made a step forward and then hesitated. He was
a middle-aged farmer, with a careworn face.

“Well, Higgins,” said the Earl.

Fauntleroy turned quickly to look at him.

“Oh!” he exclaimed, “is it Mr. Higgins?”

“Yes,” answered the Earl dryly; “and I suppose he came to take a look at
his new landlord.”

“Yes, my lord,” said the man, his sunburned face reddening. “Mr. Newick
told me his young lordship was kind enough to speak for me, and I
thought I'd like to say a word of thanks, if I might be allowed.”

Perhaps he felt some wonder when he saw what a little fellow it was who
had innocently done so much for him, and who stood there looking up just
as one of his own less fortunate children might have done--apparently
not realizing his own importance in the least.

“I've a great deal to thank your lordship for,” he said; “a great deal.
I----”

“Oh,” said Fauntleroy; “I only wrote the letter. It was my grandfather
who did it. But you know how he is about always being good to everybody.
Is Mrs. Higgins well now?”

Higgins looked a trifle taken aback. He also was somewhat startled at
hearing his noble landlord presented in the character of a benevolent
being, full of engaging qualities.

“I--well, yes, your lordship,” he stammered, “the missus is better since
the trouble was took off her mind. It was worrying broke her down.”

“I'm glad of that,” said Fauntleroy. “My grandfather was very sorry
about your children having the scarlet fever, and so was I. He has had
children himself. I'm his son's little boy, you know.”

Higgins was on the verge of being panic-stricken. He felt it would be
the safer and more discreet plan not to look at the Earl, as it had been
well known that his fatherly affection for his sons had been such that
he had seen them about twice a year, and that when they had been ill,
he had promptly departed for London, because he would not be bored with
doctors and nurses. It was a little trying, therefore, to his lordship's
nerves to be told, while he looked on, his eyes gleaming from under his
shaggy eyebrows, that he felt an interest in scarlet fever.

“You see, Higgins,” broke in the Earl with a fine grim smile, “you
people have been mistaken in me. Lord Fauntleroy understands me. When
you want reliable information on the subject of my character, apply to
him. Get into the carriage, Fauntleroy.”

And Fauntleroy jumped in, and the carriage rolled away down the green
lane, and even when it turned the corner into the high road, the Earl
was still grimly smiling.




VIII

Lord Dorincourt had occasion to wear his grim smile many a time as
the days passed by. Indeed, as his acquaintance with his grandson
progressed, he wore the smile so often that there were moments when
it almost lost its grimness. There is no denying that before Lord
Fauntleroy had appeared on the scene, the old man had been growing very
tired of his loneliness and his gout and his seventy years. After so
long a life of excitement and amusement, it was not agreeable to sit
alone even in the most splendid room, with one foot on a gout-stool,
and with no other diversion than flying into a rage, and shouting at
a frightened footman who hated the sight of him. The old Earl was too
clever a man not to know perfectly well that his servants detested
him, and that even if he had visitors, they did not come for love of
him--though some found a sort of amusement in his sharp, sarcastic talk,
which spared no one. So long as he had been strong and well, he had gone
from one place to another, pretending to amuse himself, though he had
not really enjoyed it; and when his health began to fail, he felt tired
of everything and shut himself up at Dorincourt, with his gout and his
newspapers and his books. But he could not read all the time, and he
became more and more “bored,” as he called it. He hated the long nights
and days, and he grew more and more savage and irritable. And then
Fauntleroy came; and when the Earl saw him, fortunately for the little
fellow, the secret pride of the grandfather was gratified at the outset.
If Cedric had been a less handsome little fellow, the old man might have
taken so strong a dislike to him that he would not have given himself
the chance to see his grandson's finer qualities. But he chose to
think that Cedric's beauty and fearless spirit were the results of the
Dorincourt blood and a credit to the Dorincourt rank. And then when
he heard the lad talk, and saw what a well-bred little fellow he was,
notwithstanding his boyish ignorance of all that his new position meant,
the old Earl liked his grandson more, and actually began to find himself
rather entertained. It had amused him to give into those childish hands
the power to bestow a benefit on poor Higgins. My lord cared nothing
for poor Higgins, but it pleased him a little to think that his grandson
would be talked about by the country people and would begin to be
popular with the tenantry, even in his childhood. Then it had gratified
him to drive to church with Cedric and to see the excitement and
interest caused by the arrival. He knew how the people would speak of
the beauty of the little lad; of his fine, strong, straight body; of
his erect bearing, his handsome face, and his bright hair, and how they
would say (as the Earl had heard one woman exclaim to another) that the
boy was “every inch a lord.” My lord of Dorincourt was an arrogant old
man, proud of his name, proud of his rank, and therefore proud to show
the world that at last the House of Dorincourt had an heir who was
worthy of the position he was to fill.

The morning the new pony had been tried, the Earl had been so pleased
that he had almost forgotten his gout. When the groom had brought out
the pretty creature, which arched its brown, glossy neck and tossed its
fine head in the sun, the Earl had sat at the open window of the library
and had looked on while Fauntleroy took his first riding lesson. He
wondered if the boy would show signs of timidity. It was not a very
small pony, and he had often seen children lose courage in making their
first essay at riding.

Fauntleroy mounted in great delight. He had never been on a pony before,
and he was in the highest spirits. Wilkins, the groom, led the animal by
the bridle up and down before the library window.

“He's a well plucked un, he is,” Wilkins remarked in the stable
afterward with many grins. “It weren't no trouble to put HIM up. An' a
old un wouldn't ha' sat any straighter when he WERE up. He ses--ses
he to me, 'Wilkins,' he ses, 'am I sitting up straight? They sit up
straight at the circus,' ses he. An' I ses, 'As straight as a arrer,
your lordship!'--an' he laughs, as pleased as could be, an' he ses,
'That's right,' he ses, 'you tell me if I don't sit up straight,
Wilkins!'”

But sitting up straight and being led at a walk were not altogether and
completely satisfactory. After a few minutes, Fauntleroy spoke to his
grandfather--watching him from the window:

“Can't I go by myself?” he asked; “and can't I go faster? The boy on
Fifth Avenue used to trot and canter!”

“Do you think you could trot and canter?” said the Earl.

“I should like to try,” answered Fauntleroy.

His lordship made a sign to Wilkins, who at the signal brought up his
own horse and mounted it and took Fauntleroy's pony by the leading-rein.

“Now,” said the Earl, “let him trot.”

The next few minutes were rather exciting to the small equestrian. He
found that trotting was not so easy as walking, and the faster the pony
trotted, the less easy it was.

“It j-jolts a g-goo-good deal--do-doesn't it?” he said to Wilkins.
“D-does it j-jolt y-you?”

“No, my lord,” answered Wilkins. “You'll get used to it in time. Rise in
your stirrups.”

“I'm ri-rising all the t-time,” said Fauntleroy.

He was both rising and falling rather uncomfortably and with many shakes
and bounces. He was out of breath and his face grew red, but he held on
with all his might, and sat as straight as he could. The Earl could
see that from his window. When the riders came back within speaking
distance, after they had been hidden by the trees a few minutes,
Fauntleroy's hat was off, his cheeks were like poppies, and his lips
were set, but he was still trotting manfully.

“Stop a minute!” said his grandfather. “Where's your hat?”

Wilkins touched his. “It fell off, your lordship,” he said, with evident
enjoyment. “Wouldn't let me stop to pick it up, my lord.”

“Not much afraid, is he?” asked the Earl dryly.

“Him, your lordship!” exclaimed Wilkins. “I shouldn't say as he knowed
what it meant. I've taught young gen'lemen to ride afore, an' I never
see one stick on more determinder.”

“Tired?” said the Earl to Fauntleroy. “Want to get off?”

“It jolts you more than you think it will,” admitted his young lordship
frankly. “And it tires you a little, too; but I don't want to get off.
I want to learn how. As soon as I've got my breath I want to go back for
the hat.”

The cleverest person in the world, if he had undertaken to teach
Fauntleroy how to please the old man who watched him, could not have
taught him anything which would have succeeded better. As the pony
trotted off again toward the avenue, a faint color crept up in the
fierce old face, and the eyes, under the shaggy brows, gleamed with a
pleasure such as his lordship had scarcely expected to know again. And
he sat and watched quite eagerly until the sound of the horses' hoofs
returned. When they did come, which was after some time, they came at a
faster pace. Fauntleroy's hat was still off; Wilkins was carrying it for
him; his cheeks were redder than before, and his hair was flying about
his ears, but he came at quite a brisk canter.

“There!” he panted, as they drew up, “I c-cantered. I didn't do it as
well as the boy on Fifth Avenue, but I did it, and I staid on!”

He and Wilkins and the pony were close friends after that. Scarcely a
day passed in which the country people did not see them out together,
cantering gayly on the highroad or through the green lanes. The children
in the cottages would run to the door to look at the proud little brown
pony with the gallant little figure sitting so straight in the saddle,
and the young lord would snatch off his cap and swing it at them, and
shout, “Hullo! Good-morning!” in a very unlordly manner, though with
great heartiness. Sometimes he would stop and talk with the children,
and once Wilkins came back to the castle with a story of how Fauntleroy
had insisted on dismounting near the village school, so that a boy who
was lame and tired might ride home on his pony.

“An' I'm blessed,” said Wilkins, in telling the story at the
stables,--“I'm blessed if he'd hear of anything else! He wouldn't let
me get down, because he said the boy mightn't feel comfortable on a big
horse. An' ses he, 'Wilkins,' ses he, 'that boy's lame and I'm not,
and I want to talk to him, too.' And up the lad has to get, and my lord
trudges alongside of him with his hands in his pockets, and his cap on
the back of his head, a-whistling and talking as easy as you please!
And when we come to the cottage, an' the boy's mother come out all in a
taking to see what's up, he whips off his cap an' ses he, 'I've brought
your son home, ma'am,' ses he, 'because his leg hurt him, and I don't
think that stick is enough for him to lean on; and I'm going to ask my
grandfather to have a pair of crutches made for him.' An' I'm blessed if
the woman wasn't struck all of a heap, as well she might be! I thought I
should 'a' hex-plodid, myself!”

When the Earl heard the story he was not angry, as Wilkins had been
half afraid that he would be; on the contrary, he laughed outright, and
called Fauntleroy up to him, and made him tell all about the matter from
beginning to end, and then he laughed again. And actually, a few days
later, the Dorincourt carriage stopped in the green lane before the
cottage where the lame boy lived, and Fauntleroy jumped out and
walked up to the door, carrying a pair of strong, light, new crutches
shouldered like a gun, and presented them to Mrs. Hartle (the lame boy's
name was Hartle) with these words: “My grandfather's compliments, and if
you please, these are for your boy, and we hope he will get better.”

“I said your compliments,” he explained to the Earl when he returned to
the carriage. “You didn't tell me to, but I thought perhaps you forgot.
That was right, wasn't it?”

And the Earl laughed again, and did not say it was not. In fact, the two
were becoming more intimate every day, and every day Fauntleroy's faith
in his lordship's benevolence and virtue increased. He had no doubt
whatever that his grandfather was the most amiable and generous of
elderly gentlemen. Certainly, he himself found his wishes gratified
almost before they were uttered; and such gifts and pleasures were
lavished upon him, that he was sometimes almost bewildered by his own
possessions. Apparently, he was to have everything he wanted, and to
do everything he wished to do. And though this would certainly not have
been a very wise plan to pursue with all small boys, his young lordship
bore it amazingly well. Perhaps, notwithstanding his sweet nature, he
might have been somewhat spoiled by it, if it had not been for the
hours he spent with his mother at Court Lodge. That “best friend” of his
watched over him ever closely and tenderly. The two had many long talks
together, and he never went back to the Castle with her kisses on his
cheeks without carrying in his heart some simple, pure words worth
remembering.

There was one thing, it is true, which puzzled the little fellow very
much. He thought over the mystery of it much oftener than any one
supposed; even his mother did not know how often he pondered on it; the
Earl for a long time never suspected that he did so at all. But, being
quick to observe, the little boy could not help wondering why it was
that his mother and grandfather never seemed to meet. He had noticed
that they never did meet. When the Dorincourt carriage stopped at
Court Lodge, the Earl never alighted, and on the rare occasions of his
lordship's going to church, Fauntleroy was always left to speak to his
mother in the porch alone, or perhaps to go home with her. And
yet, every day, fruit and flowers were sent to Court Lodge from the
hot-houses at the Castle. But the one virtuous action of the Earl's
which had set him upon the pinnacle of perfection in Cedric's eyes, was
what he had done soon after that first Sunday when Mrs. Errol had walked
home from church unattended. About a week later, when Cedric was going
one day to visit his mother, he found at the door, instead of the large
carriage and prancing pair, a pretty little brougham and a handsome bay
horse.

“That is a present from you to your mother,” the Earl said abruptly.
“She can not go walking about the country. She needs a carriage. The man
who drives will take charge of it. It is a present from YOU.”

Fauntleroy's delight could but feebly express itself. He could scarcely
contain himself until he reached the lodge. His mother was gathering
roses in the garden. He flung himself out of the little brougham and
flew to her.

“Dearest!” he cried, “could you believe it? This is yours! He says it is
a present from me. It is your own carriage to drive everywhere in!”

He was so happy that she did not know what to say. She could not have
borne to spoil his pleasure by refusing to accept the gift even though
it came from the man who chose to consider himself her enemy. She was
obliged to step into the carriage, roses and all, and let herself be
taken to drive, while Fauntleroy told her stories of his grandfather's
goodness and amiability. They were such innocent stories that sometimes
she could not help laughing a little, and then she would draw her little
boy closer to her side and kiss him, feeling glad that he could see only
good in the old man, who had so few friends.

The very next day after that, Fauntleroy wrote to Mr. Hobbs. He wrote
quite a long letter, and after the first copy was written, he brought it
to his grandfather to be inspected.

“Because,” he said, “it's so uncertain about the spelling. And if you'll
tell me the mistakes, I'll write it out again.”

This was what he had written:


“My dear mr hobbs i want to tell you about my granfarther he is the best
earl you ever new it is a mistake about earls being tirents he is not a
tirent at all i wish you new him you would be good friends i am sure
you would he has the gout in his foot and is a grate sufrer but he is
so pashent i love him more every day becaus no one could help loving an
earl like that who is kind to every one in this world i wish you
could talk to him he knows everything in the world you can ask him any
question but he has never plaid base ball he has given me a pony and a
cart and my mamma a bewtifle cariage and I have three rooms and toys of
all kinds it would serprise you you would like the castle and the park
it is such a large castle you could lose yourself wilkins tells me
wilkins is my groom he says there is a dungon under the castle it is
so pretty everything in the park would serprise you there are such big
trees and there are deers and rabbits and games flying about in the
cover my granfarther is very rich but he is not proud and orty as you
thought earls always were i like to be with him the people are so polite
and kind they take of their hats to you and the women make curtsies and
sometimes say god bless you i can ride now but at first it shook me when
i troted my granfarther let a poor man stay on his farm when he could
not pay his rent and mrs mellon went to take wine and things to his sick
children i should like to see you and i wish dearest could live at the
castle but i am very happy when i dont miss her too much and i love my
granfarther every one does plees write soon

“your afechshnet old frend

“Cedric Errol

“p s no one is in the dungon my granfarfher never had any one langwishin
in there.

“p s he is such a good earl he reminds me of you he is a unerversle
favrit”


“Do you miss your mother very much?” asked the Earl when he had finished
reading this.

“Yes,” said Fauntleroy, “I miss her all the time.”

He went and stood before the Earl and put his hand on his knee, looking
up at him.

“YOU don't miss her, do you?” he said.

“I don't know her,” answered his lordship rather crustily.

“I know that,” said Fauntleroy, “and that's what makes me wonder. She
told me not to ask you any questions, and--and I won't, but sometimes I
can't help thinking, you know, and it makes me all puzzled. But I'm not
going to ask any questions. And when I miss her very much, I go and
look out of my window to where I see her light shine for me every night
through an open place in the trees. It is a long way off, but she puts
it in her window as soon as it is dark, and I can see it twinkle far
away, and I know what it says.”

“What does it say?” asked my lord.

“It says, 'Good-night, God keep you all the night!'--just what she used
to say when we were together. Every night she used to say that to me,
and every morning she said, 'God bless you all the day!' So you see I am
quite safe all the time----”

“Quite, I have no doubt,” said his lordship dryly. And he drew down his
beetling eyebrows and looked at the little boy so fixedly and so long
that Fauntleroy wondered what he could be thinking of.




IX

The fact was, his lordship the Earl of Dorincourt thought in those
days, of many things of which he had never thought before, and all his
thoughts were in one way or another connected with his grandson. His
pride was the strongest part of his nature, and the boy gratified it at
every point. Through this pride he began to find a new interest in life.
He began to take pleasure in showing his heir to the world. The world
had known of his disappointment in his sons; so there was an agreeable
touch of triumph in exhibiting this new Lord Fauntleroy, who could
disappoint no one. He wished the child to appreciate his own power and
to understand the splendor of his position; he wished that others should
realize it too. He made plans for his future.

Sometimes in secret he actually found himself wishing that his own past
life had been a better one, and that there had been less in it that this
pure, childish heart would shrink from if it knew the truth. It was not
agreeable to think how the beautiful, innocent face would look if its
owner should be made by any chance to understand that his grandfather
had been called for many a year “the wicked Earl of Dorincourt.” The
thought even made him feel a trifle nervous. He did not wish the boy
to find it out. Sometimes in this new interest he forgot his gout,
and after a while his doctor was surprised to find his noble patient's
health growing better than he had expected it ever would be again.
Perhaps the Earl grew better because the time did not pass so slowly for
him, and he had something to think of beside his pains and infirmities.

One fine morning, people were amazed to see little Lord Fauntleroy
riding his pony with another companion than Wilkins. This new companion
rode a tall, powerful gray horse, and was no other than the Earl
himself. It was, in fact, Fauntleroy who had suggested this plan. As he
had been on the point of mounting his pony, he had said rather wistfully
to his grandfather:

“I wish you were going with me. When I go away I feel lonely because
you are left all by yourself in such a big castle. I wish you could ride
too.”

And the greatest excitement had been aroused in the stables a few
minutes later by the arrival of an order that Selim was to be saddled
for the Earl. After that, Selim was saddled almost every day; and the
people became accustomed to the sight of the tall gray horse carrying
the tall gray old man, with his handsome, fierce, eagle face, by the
side of the brown pony which bore little Lord Fauntleroy. And in their
rides together through the green lanes and pretty country roads, the two
riders became more intimate than ever. And gradually the old man heard
a great deal about “Dearest” and her life. As Fauntleroy trotted by the
big horse he chatted gayly. There could not well have been a brighter
little comrade, his nature was so happy. It was he who talked the most.
The Earl often was silent, listening and watching the joyous, glowing
face. Sometimes he would tell his young companion to set the pony off at
a gallop, and when the little fellow dashed off, sitting so straight and
fearless, he would watch him with a gleam of pride and pleasure in his
eyes; and when, after such a dash, Fauntleroy came back waving his cap
with a laughing shout, he always felt that he and his grandfather were
very good friends indeed.

One thing that the Earl discovered was that his son's wife did not lead
an idle life. It was not long before he learned that the poor people
knew her very well indeed. When there was sickness or sorrow or poverty
in any house, the little brougham often stood before the door.

“Do you know,” said Fauntleroy once, “they all say, 'God bless you!'
when they see her, and the children are glad. There are some who go to
her house to be taught to sew. She says she feels so rich now that she
wants to help the poor ones.”

It had not displeased the Earl to find that the mother of his heir had a
beautiful young face and looked as much like a lady as if she had been
a duchess; and in one way it did not displease him to know that she was
popular and beloved by the poor. And yet he was often conscious of a
hard, jealous pang when he saw how she filled her child's heart and how
the boy clung to her as his best beloved. The old man would have desired
to stand first himself and have no rival.

That same morning he drew up his horse on an elevated point of the moor
over which they rode, and made a gesture with his whip, over the broad,
beautiful landscape spread before them.

“Do you know that all that land belongs to me?” he said to Fauntleroy.

“Does it?” answered Fauntleroy. “How much it is to belong to one person,
and how beautiful!”

“Do you know that some day it will all belong to you--that and a great
deal more?”

“To me!” exclaimed Fauntleroy in rather an awe-stricken voice. “When?”

“When I am dead,” his grandfather answered.

“Then I don't want it,” said Fauntleroy; “I want you to live always.”

“That's kind,” answered the Earl in his dry way; “nevertheless, some day
it will all be yours--some day you will be the Earl of Dorincourt.”

Little Lord Fauntleroy sat very still in his saddle for a few moments.
He looked over the broad moors, the green farms, the beautiful copses,
the cottages in the lanes, the pretty village, and over the trees to
where the turrets of the great castle rose, gray and stately. Then he
gave a queer little sigh.

“What are you thinking of?” asked the Earl.

“I am thinking,” replied Fauntleroy, “what a little boy I am! and of
what Dearest said to me.”

“What was it?” inquired the Earl.

“She said that perhaps it was not so easy to be very rich; that if any
one had so many things always, one might sometimes forget that every
one else was not so fortunate, and that one who is rich should always
be careful and try to remember. I was talking to her about how good you
were, and she said that was such a good thing, because an earl had
so much power, and if he cared only about his own pleasure and never
thought about the people who lived on his lands, they might have trouble
that he could help--and there were so many people, and it would be such
a hard thing. And I was just looking at all those houses, and thinking
how I should have to find out about the people, when I was an earl. How
did you find out about them?”

As his lordship's knowledge of his tenantry consisted in finding out
which of them paid their rent promptly, and in turning out those who
did not, this was rather a hard question. “Newick finds out for me,”
 he said, and he pulled his great gray mustache, and looked at his small
questioner rather uneasily. “We will go home now,” he added; “and when
you are an earl, see to it that you are a better earl than I have been!”

He was very silent as they rode home. He felt it to be almost incredible
that he who had never really loved any one in his life, should find
himself growing so fond of this little fellow,--as without doubt he
was. At first he had only been pleased and proud of Cedric's beauty and
bravery, but there was something more than pride in his feeling now. He
laughed a grim, dry laugh all to himself sometimes, when he thought how
he liked to have the boy near him, how he liked to hear his voice, and
how in secret he really wished to be liked and thought well of by his
small grandson.

“I'm an old fellow in my dotage, and I have nothing else to think of,”
 he would say to himself; and yet he knew it was not that altogether.
And if he had allowed himself to admit the truth, he would perhaps have
found himself obliged to own that the very things which attracted him,
in spite of himself, were the qualities he had never possessed--the
frank, true, kindly nature, the affectionate trustfulness which could
never think evil.

It was only about a week after that ride when, after a visit to his
mother, Fauntleroy came into the library with a troubled, thoughtful
face. He sat down in that high-backed chair in which he had sat on the
evening of his arrival, and for a while he looked at the embers on the
hearth. The Earl watched him in silence, wondering what was coming. It
was evident that Cedric had something on his mind. At last he looked up.
“Does Newick know all about the people?” he asked.

“It is his business to know about them,” said his lordship. “Been
neglecting it--has he?”

Contradictory as it may seem, there was nothing which entertained and
edified him more than the little fellow's interest in his tenantry. He
had never taken any interest in them himself, but it pleased him well
enough that, with all his childish habits of thought and in the midst
of all his childish amusements and high spirits, there should be such a
quaint seriousness working in the curly head.

“There is a place,” said Fauntleroy, looking up at him with wide-open,
horror-stricken eye--“Dearest has seen it; it is at the other end of the
village. The houses are close together, and almost falling down; you
can scarcely breathe; and the people are so poor, and everything is
dreadful! Often they have fever, and the children die; and it makes them
wicked to live like that, and be so poor and miserable! It is worse than
Michael and Bridget! The rain comes in at the roof! Dearest went to see
a poor woman who lived there. She would not let me come near her until
she had changed all her things. The tears ran down her cheeks when she
told me about it!”

The tears had come into his own eyes, but he smiled through them.

“I told her you didn't know, and I would tell you,” he said. He jumped
down and came and leaned against the Earl's chair. “You can make it all
right,” he said, “just as you made it all right for Higgins. You always
make it all right for everybody. I told her you would, and that Newick
must have forgotten to tell you.”

The Earl looked down at the hand on his knee. Newick had not forgotten
to tell him; in fact, Newick had spoken to him more than once of the
desperate condition of the end of the village known as Earl's Court.
He knew all about the tumble-down, miserable cottages, and the bad
drainage, and the damp walls and broken windows and leaking roofs,
and all about the poverty, the fever, and the misery. Mr. Mordaunt
had painted it all to him in the strongest words he could use, and his
lordship had used violent language in response; and, when his gout had
been at the worst, he said that the sooner the people of Earl's Court
died and were buried by the parish the better it would be,--and there
was an end of the matter. And yet, as he looked at the small hand on his
knee, and from the small hand to the honest, earnest, frank-eyed face,
he was actually a little ashamed both of Earl's Court and himself.

“What!” he said; “you want to make a builder of model cottages of me,
do you?” And he positively put his own hand upon the childish one and
stroked it.

“Those must be pulled down,” said Fauntleroy, with great eagerness.
“Dearest says so. Let us--let us go and have them pulled down to-morrow.
The people will be so glad when they see you! They'll know you have come
to help them!” And his eyes shone like stars in his glowing face.

The Earl rose from his chair and put his hand on the child's shoulder.
“Let us go out and take our walk on the terrace,” he said, with a short
laugh; “and we can talk it over.”

And though he laughed two or three times again, as they walked to and
fro on the broad stone terrace, where they walked together almost
every fine evening, he seemed to be thinking of something which did
not displease him, and still he kept his hand on his small companion's
shoulder.




X

The truth was that Mrs. Errol had found a great many sad things in the
course of her work among the poor of the little village that appeared so
picturesque when it was seen from the moor-sides. Everything was not as
picturesque, when seen near by, as it looked from a distance. She had
found idleness and poverty and ignorance where there should have been
comfort and industry. And she had discovered, after a while, that
Erleboro was considered to be the worst village in that part of the
country. Mr. Mordaunt had told her a great many of his difficulties
and discouragements, and she had found out a great deal by herself. The
agents who had managed the property had always been chosen to please the
Earl, and had cared nothing for the degradation and wretchedness of the
poor tenants. Many things, therefore, had been neglected which should
have been attended to, and matters had gone from bad to worse.

As to Earl's Court, it was a disgrace, with its dilapidated houses and
miserable, careless, sickly people. When first Mrs. Errol went to the
place, it made her shudder. Such ugliness and slovenliness and want
seemed worse in a country place than in a city. It seemed as if there it
might be helped. And as she looked at the squalid, uncared-for children
growing up in the midst of vice and brutal indifference, she thought
of her own little boy spending his days in the great, splendid castle,
guarded and served like a young prince, having no wish ungratified, and
knowing nothing but luxury and ease and beauty. And a bold thought came
in her wise little mother-heart. Gradually she had begun to see, as had
others, that it had been her boy's good fortune to please the Earl very
much, and that he would scarcely be likely to be denied anything for
which he expressed a desire.

“The Earl would give him anything,” she said to Mr. Mordaunt. “He would
indulge his every whim. Why should not that indulgence be used for the
good of others? It is for me to see that this shall come to pass.”

She knew she could trust the kind, childish heart; so she told the
little fellow the story of Earl's Court, feeling sure that he would
speak of it to his grandfather, and hoping that some good results would
follow.

And strange as it appeared to every one, good results did follow.

The fact was that the strongest power to influence the Earl was his
grandson's perfect confidence in him--the fact that Cedric always
believed that his grandfather was going to do what was right and
generous. He could not quite make up his mind to let him discover that
he had no inclination to be generous at all, and that he wanted his
own way on all occasions, whether it was right or wrong. It was such
a novelty to be regarded with admiration as a benefactor of the entire
human race, and the soul of nobility, that he did not enjoy the idea of
looking into the affectionate brown eyes, and saying: “I am a violent,
selfish old rascal; I never did a generous thing in my life, and I don't
care about Earl's Court or the poor people”--or something which would
amount to the same thing. He actually had learned to be fond enough
of that small boy with the mop of yellow love-locks, to feel that he
himself would prefer to be guilty of an amiable action now and then.
And so--though he laughed at himself--after some reflection, he sent for
Newick, and had quite a long interview with him on the subject of the
Court, and it was decided that the wretched hovels should be pulled down
and new houses should be built.

“It is Lord Fauntleroy who insists on it,” he said dryly; “he thinks it
will improve the property. You can tell the tenants that it's his
idea.” And he looked down at his small lordship, who was lying on the
hearth-rug playing with Dougal. The great dog was the lad's constant
companion, and followed him about everywhere, stalking solemnly after
him when he walked, and trotting majestically behind when he rode or
drove.

Of course, both the country people and the town people heard of the
proposed improvement. At first, many of them would not believe it; but
when a small army of workmen arrived and commenced pulling down the
crazy, squalid cottages, people began to understand that little Lord
Fauntleroy had done them a good turn again, and that through his
innocent interference the scandal of Earl's Court had at last been
removed. If he had only known how they talked about him and praised him
everywhere, and prophesied great things for him when he grew up, how
astonished he would have been! But he never suspected it. He lived his
simple, happy, child life,--frolicking about in the park; chasing the
rabbits to their burrows; lying under the trees on the grass, or on
the rug in the library, reading wonderful books and talking to the Earl
about them, and then telling the stories again to his mother; writing
long letters to Dick and Mr. Hobbs, who responded in characteristic
fashion; riding out at his grandfather's side, or with Wilkins as
escort. As they rode through the market town, he used to see the people
turn and look, and he noticed that as they lifted their hats their
faces often brightened very much; but he thought it was all because his
grandfather was with him.

“They are so fond of you,” he once said, looking up at his lordship with
a bright smile. “Do you see how glad they are when they see you? I hope
they will some day be as fond of me. It must be nice to have EVERYbody
like you.” And he felt quite proud to be the grandson of so greatly
admired and beloved an individual.

When the cottages were being built, the lad and his grandfather used to
ride over to Earl's Court together to look at them, and Fauntleroy
was full of interest. He would dismount from his pony and go and make
acquaintance with the workmen, asking them questions about building and
bricklaying, and telling them things about America. After two or three
such conversations, he was able to enlighten the Earl on the subject of
brick-making, as they rode home.

“I always like to know about things like those,” he said, “because you
never know what you are coming to.”

When he left them, the workmen used to talk him over among themselves,
and laugh at his odd, innocent speeches; but they liked him, and
liked to see him stand among them, talking away, with his hands in his
pockets, his hat pushed back on his curls, and his small face full
of eagerness. “He's a rare un,” they used to say. “An' a noice little
outspoken chap, too. Not much o' th' bad stock in him.” And they would
go home and tell their wives about him, and the women would tell each
other, and so it came about that almost every one talked of, or knew
some story of, little Lord Fauntleroy; and gradually almost every
one knew that the “wicked Earl” had found something he cared for at
last--something which had touched and even warmed his hard, bitter old
heart.

But no one knew quite how much it had been warmed, and how day by day
the old man found himself caring more and more for the child, who was
the only creature that had ever trusted him. He found himself looking
forward to the time when Cedric would be a young man, strong and
beautiful, with life all before him, but having still that kind heart
and the power to make friends everywhere, and the Earl wondered what the
lad would do, and how he would use his gifts. Often as he watched the
little fellow lying upon the hearth, conning some big book, the light
shining on the bright young head, his old eyes would gleam and his cheek
would flush.

“The boy can do anything,” he would say to himself, “anything!”

He never spoke to any one else of his feeling for Cedric; when he spoke
of him to others it was always with the same grim smile. But Fauntleroy
soon knew that his grandfather loved him and always liked him to be
near--near to his chair if they were in the library, opposite to him at
table, or by his side when he rode or drove or took his evening walk on
the broad terrace.

“Do you remember,” Cedric said once, looking up from his book as he lay
on the rug, “do you remember what I said to you that first night about
our being good companions? I don't think any people could be better
companions than we are, do you?”

“We are pretty good companions, I should say,” replied his lordship.
“Come here.”

Fauntleroy scrambled up and went to him.

“Is there anything you want,” the Earl asked; “anything you have not?”

The little fellow's brown eyes fixed themselves on his grandfather with
a rather wistful look.

“Only one thing,” he answered.

“What is that?” inquired the Earl.

Fauntleroy was silent a second. He had not thought matters over to
himself so long for nothing.

“What is it?” my lord repeated.

Fauntleroy answered.

“It is Dearest,” he said.

The old Earl winced a little.

“But you see her almost every day,” he said. “Is not that enough?”

“I used to see her all the time,” said Fauntleroy. “She used to kiss me
when I went to sleep at night, and in the morning she was always there,
and we could tell each other things without waiting.”

The old eyes and the young ones looked into each other through a moment
of silence. Then the Earl knitted his brows.

“Do you NEVER forget about your mother?” he said.

“No,” answered Fauntleroy, “never; and she never forgets about me.
I shouldn't forget about YOU, you know, if I didn't live with you. I
should think about you all the more.”

“Upon my word,” said the Earl, after looking at him a moment longer, “I
believe you would!”

The jealous pang that came when the boy spoke so of his mother seemed
even stronger than it had been before; it was stronger because of this
old man's increasing affection for the boy.

But it was not long before he had other pangs, so much harder to face
that he almost forgot, for the time, he had ever hated his son's wife at
all. And in a strange and startling way it happened. One evening, just
before the Earl's Court cottages were completed, there was a grand
dinner party at Dorincourt. There had not been such a party at the
Castle for a long time. A few days before it took place, Sir Harry
Lorridaile and Lady Lorridaile, who was the Earl's only sister, actually
came for a visit--a thing which caused the greatest excitement in the
village and set Mrs. Dibble's shop-bell tinkling madly again, because
it was well known that Lady Lorridaile had only been to Dorincourt once
since her marriage, thirty-five years before. She was a handsome old
lady with white curls and dimpled, peachy cheeks, and she was as good
as gold, but she had never approved of her brother any more than did the
rest of the world, and having a strong will of her own and not being
at all afraid to speak her mind frankly, she had, after several lively
quarrels with his lordship, seen very little of him since her young
days.

She had heard a great deal of him that was not pleasant through the
years in which they had been separated. She had heard about his neglect
of his wife, and of the poor lady's death; and of his indifference to
his children; and of the two weak, vicious, unprepossessing elder boys
who had been no credit to him or to any one else. Those two elder
sons, Bevis and Maurice, she had never seen; but once there had come to
Lorridaile Park a tall, stalwart, beautiful young fellow about eighteen
years old, who had told her that he was her nephew Cedric Errol, and
that he had come to see her because he was passing near the place and
wished to look at his Aunt Constantia of whom he had heard his mother
speak. Lady Lorridaile's kind heart had warmed through and through at
the sight of the young man, and she had made him stay with her a week,
and petted him, and made much of him and admired him immensely. He was
so sweet-tempered, light-hearted, spirited a lad, that when he went
away, she had hoped to see him often again; but she never did, because
the Earl had been in a bad humor when he went back to Dorincourt,
and had forbidden him ever to go to Lorridaile Park again. But Lady
Lorridaile had always remembered him tenderly, and though she feared he
had made a rash marriage in America, she had been very angry when she
heard how he had been cast off by his father and that no one really knew
where or how he lived. At last there came a rumor of his death, and then
Bevis had been thrown from his horse and killed, and Maurice had died in
Rome of the fever; and soon after came the story of the American child
who was to be found and brought home as Lord Fauntleroy.

“Probably to be ruined as the others were,” she said to her husband,
“unless his mother is good enough and has a will of her own to help her
to take care of him.”

But when she heard that Cedric's mother had been parted from him she was
almost too indignant for words.

“It is disgraceful, Harry!” she said. “Fancy a child of that age being
taken from his mother, and made the companion of a man like my brother!
He will either be brutal to the boy or indulge him until he is a little
monster. If I thought it would do any good to write----”

“It wouldn't, Constantia,” said Sir Harry.

“I know it wouldn't,” she answered. “I know his lordship the Earl of
Dorincourt too well;--but it is outrageous.”

Not only the poor people and farmers heard about little Lord Fauntleroy;
others knew him. He was talked about so much and there were so many
stories of him--of his beauty, his sweet temper, his popularity, and
his growing influence over the Earl, his grandfather--that rumors of him
reached the gentry at their country places and he was heard of in
more than one county of England. People talked about him at the dinner
tables, ladies pitied his young mother, and wondered if the boy were as
handsome as he was said to be, and men who knew the Earl and his habits
laughed heartily at the stories of the little fellow's belief in his
lordship's amiability. Sir Thomas Asshe of Asshawe Hall, being in
Erleboro one day, met the Earl and his grandson riding together, and
stopped to shake hands with my lord and congratulate him on his change
of looks and on his recovery from the gout. “And, d' ye know,” he said,
when he spoke of the incident afterward, “the old man looked as proud as
a turkey-cock; and upon my word I don't wonder, for a handsomer, finer
lad than his grandson I never saw! As straight as a dart, and sat his
pony like a young trooper!”

And so by degrees Lady Lorridaile, too, heard of the child; she heard
about Higgins and the lame boy, and the cottages at Earl's Court, and a
score of other things,--and she began to wish to see the little fellow.
And just as she was wondering how it might be brought about, to her
utter astonishment, she received a letter from her brother inviting her
to come with her husband to Dorincourt.

“It seems incredible!” she exclaimed. “I have heard it said that the
child has worked miracles, and I begin to believe it. They say my
brother adores the boy and can scarcely endure to have him out of sight.
And he is so proud of him! Actually, I believe he wants to show him to
us.” And she accepted the invitation at once.

When she reached Dorincourt Castle with Sir Harry, it was late in the
afternoon, and she went to her room at once before seeing her brother.
Having dressed for dinner, she entered the drawing-room. The Earl was
there standing near the fire and looking very tall and imposing; and at
his side stood a little boy in black velvet, and a large Vandyke collar
of rich lace--a little fellow whose round bright face was so handsome,
and who turned upon her such beautiful, candid brown eyes, that she
almost uttered an exclamation of pleasure and surprise at the sight.

As she shook hands with the Earl, she called him by the name she had not
used since her girlhood.

“What, Molyneux!” she said, “is this the child?”

“Yes, Constantia,” answered the Earl, “this is the boy. Fauntleroy, this
is your grand-aunt, Lady Lorridaile.”

“How do you do, Grand-Aunt?” said Fauntleroy.

Lady Lorridaile put her hand on his shoulders, and after looking down
into his upraised face a few seconds, kissed him warmly.

“I am your Aunt Constantia,” she said, “and I loved your poor papa, and
you are very like him.”

“It makes me glad when I am told I am like him,” answered Fauntleroy,
“because it seems as if every one liked him,--just like Dearest,
eszackly,--Aunt Constantia” (adding the two words after a second's
pause).

Lady Lorridaile was delighted. She bent and kissed him again, and from
that moment they were warm friends.

“Well, Molyneux,” she said aside to the Earl afterward, “it could not
possibly be better than this!”

“I think not,” answered his lordship dryly. “He is a fine little
fellow. We are great friends. He believes me to be the most charming
and sweet-tempered of philanthropists. I will confess to you,
Constantia,--as you would find it out if I did not,--that I am in some
slight danger of becoming rather an old fool about him.”

“What does his mother think of you?” asked Lady Lorridaile, with her
usual straightforwardness.

“I have not asked her,” answered the Earl, slightly scowling.

“Well,” said Lady Lorridaile, “I will be frank with you at the outset,
Molyneux, and tell you I don't approve of your course, and that it is my
intention to call on Mrs. Errol as soon as possible; so if you wish to
quarrel with me, you had better mention it at once. What I hear of the
young creature makes me quite sure that her child owes her everything.
We were told even at Lorridaile Park that your poorer tenants adore her
already.”

“They adore HIM,” said the Earl, nodding toward Fauntleroy. “As to Mrs.
Errol, you'll find her a pretty little woman. I'm rather in debt to her
for giving some of her beauty to the boy, and you can go to see her if
you like. All I ask is that she will remain at Court Lodge and that you
will not ask me to go and see her,” and he scowled a little again.

“But he doesn't hate her as much as he used to, that is plain enough to
me,” her ladyship said to Sir Harry afterward. “And he is a changed man
in a measure, and, incredible as it may seem, Harry, it is my opinion
that he is being made into a human being, through nothing more nor less
than his affection for that innocent, affectionate little fellow. Why,
the child actually loves him--leans on his chair and against his knee.
His own children would as soon have thought of nestling up to a tiger.”

The very next day she went to call upon Mrs. Errol. When she returned,
she said to her brother:

“Molyneux, she is the loveliest little woman I ever saw! She has a voice
like a silver bell, and you may thank her for making the boy what he is.
She has given him more than her beauty, and you make a great mistake in
not persuading her to come and take charge of you. I shall invite her to
Lorridaile.”

“She'll not leave the boy,” replied the Earl.

“I must have the boy too,” said Lady Lorridaile, laughing.

But she knew Fauntleroy would not be given up to her, and each day she
saw more clearly how closely those two had grown to each other, and
how all the proud, grim old man's ambition and hope and love centered
themselves in the child, and how the warm, innocent nature returned his
affection with most perfect trust and good faith.

She knew, too, that the prime reason for the great dinner party was the
Earl's secret desire to show the world his grandson and heir, and to let
people see that the boy who had been so much spoken of and described was
even a finer little specimen of boyhood than rumor had made him.

“Bevis and Maurice were such a bitter humiliation to him,” she said to
her husband. “Every one knew it. He actually hated them. His pride
has full sway here.” Perhaps there was not one person who accepted the
invitation without feeling some curiosity about little Lord Fauntleroy,
and wondering if he would be on view.

And when the time came he was on view.

“The lad has good manners,” said the Earl. “He will be in no one's
way. Children are usually idiots or bores,--mine were both,--but he can
actually answer when he's spoken to, and be silent when he is not. He is
never offensive.”

But he was not allowed to be silent very long. Every one had something
to say to him. The fact was they wished to make him talk. The ladies
petted him and asked him questions, and the men asked him questions too,
and joked with him, as the men on the steamer had done when he crossed
the Atlantic. Fauntleroy did not quite understand why they laughed so
sometimes when he answered them, but he was so used to seeing people
amused when he was quite serious, that he did not mind. He thought the
whole evening delightful. The magnificent rooms were so brilliant with
lights, there were so many flowers, the gentlemen seemed so gay, and
the ladies wore such beautiful, wonderful dresses, and such sparkling
ornaments in their hair and on their necks. There was one young lady
who, he heard them say, had just come down from London, where she had
spent the “season”; and she was so charming that he could not keep his
eyes from her. She was a rather tall young lady with a proud little
head, and very soft dark hair, and large eyes the color of purple
pansies, and the color on her cheeks and lips was like that of a rose.
She was dressed in a beautiful white dress, and had pearls around her
throat. There was one strange thing about this young lady. So many
gentlemen stood near her, and seemed anxious to please her, that
Fauntleroy thought she must be something like a princess. He was so much
interested in her that without knowing it he drew nearer and nearer to
her, and at last she turned and spoke to him.

“Come here, Lord Fauntleroy,” she said, smiling; “and tell me why you
look at me so.”

“I was thinking how beautiful you are,” his young lordship replied.

Then all the gentlemen laughed outright, and the young lady laughed a
little too, and the rose color in her cheeks brightened.

“Ah, Fauntleroy,” said one of the gentlemen who had laughed most
heartily, “make the most of your time! When you are older you will not
have the courage to say that.”

“But nobody could help saying it,” said Fauntleroy sweetly. “Could you
help it? Don't YOU think she is pretty, too?”

“We are not allowed to say what we think,” said the gentleman, while the
rest laughed more than ever.

But the beautiful young lady--her name was Miss Vivian Herbert--put out
her hand and drew Cedric to her side, looking prettier than before, if
possible.

“Lord Fauntleroy shall say what he thinks,” she said; “and I am much
obliged to him. I am sure he thinks what he says.” And she kissed him on
his cheek.

“I think you are prettier than any one I ever saw,” said Fauntleroy,
looking at her with innocent, admiring eyes, “except Dearest. Of course,
I couldn't think any one QUITE as pretty as Dearest. I think she is the
prettiest person in the world.”

“I am sure she is,” said Miss Vivian Herbert. And she laughed and kissed
his cheek again.

She kept him by her side a great part of the evening, and the group
of which they were the center was very gay. He did not know how it
happened, but before long he was telling them all about America, and
the Republican Rally, and Mr. Hobbs and Dick, and in the end he
proudly produced from his pocket Dick's parting gift,--the red silk
handkerchief.

“I put it in my pocket to-night because it was a party,” he said. “I
thought Dick would like me to wear it at a party.”

And queer as the big, flaming, spotted thing was, there was a serious,
affectionate look in his eyes, which prevented his audience from
laughing very much.

“You see, I like it,” he said, “because Dick is my friend.”

But though he was talked to so much, as the Earl had said, he was in no
one's way. He could be quiet and listen when others talked, and so no
one found him tiresome. A slight smile crossed more than one face when
several times he went and stood near his grandfather's chair, or sat on
a stool close to him, watching him and absorbing every word he uttered
with the most charmed interest. Once he stood so near the chair's arm
that his cheek touched the Earl's shoulder, and his lordship, detecting
the general smile, smiled a little himself. He knew what the lookers-on
were thinking, and he felt some secret amusement in their seeing what
good friends he was with this youngster, who might have been expected to
share the popular opinion of him.

Mr. Havisham had been expected to arrive in the afternoon, but, strange
to say, he was late. Such a thing had really never been known to happen
before during all the years in which he had been a visitor at Dorincourt
Castle. He was so late that the guests were on the point of rising to
go in to dinner when he arrived. When he approached his host, the Earl
regarded him with amazement. He looked as if he had been hurried or
agitated; his dry, keen old face was actually pale.

“I was detained,” he said, in a low voice to the Earl, “by--an
extraordinary event.”

It was as unlike the methodic old lawyer to be agitated by anything as
it was to be late, but it was evident that he had been disturbed. At
dinner he ate scarcely anything, and two or three times, when he was
spoken to, he started as if his thoughts were far away. At dessert,
when Fauntleroy came in, he looked at him more than once, nervously
and uneasily. Fauntleroy noted the look and wondered at it. He and Mr.
Havisham were on friendly terms, and they usually exchanged smiles. The
lawyer seemed to have forgotten to smile that evening.

The fact was, he forgot everything but the strange and painful news he
knew he must tell the Earl before the night was over--the strange news
which he knew would be so terrible a shock, and which would change the
face of everything. As he looked about at the splendid rooms and the
brilliant company,--at the people gathered together, he knew, more that
they might see the bright-haired little fellow near the Earl's chair
than for any other reason,--as he looked at the proud old man and at
little Lord Fauntleroy smiling at his side, he really felt quite shaken,
notwithstanding that he was a hardened old lawyer. What a blow it was
that he must deal them!

He did not exactly know how the long, superb dinner ended. He sat
through it as if he were in a dream, and several times he saw the Earl
glance at him in surprise.

But it was over at last, and the gentlemen joined the ladies in the
drawing-room. They found Fauntleroy sitting on the sofa with Miss Vivian
Herbert,--the great beauty of the last London season; they had been
looking at some pictures, and he was thanking his companion as the door
opened.

“I'm ever so much obliged to you for being so kind to me!” he was
saying; “I never was at a party before, and I've enjoyed myself so
much!”

He had enjoyed himself so much that when the gentlemen gathered about
Miss Herbert again and began to talk to her, as he listened and tried
to understand their laughing speeches, his eyelids began to droop. They
drooped until they covered his eyes two or three times, and then the
sound of Miss Herbert's low, pretty laugh would bring him back, and he
would open them again for about two seconds. He was quite sure he was
not going to sleep, but there was a large, yellow satin cushion behind
him and his head sank against it, and after a while his eyelids drooped
for the last time. They did not even quite open when, as it seemed a
long time after, some one kissed him lightly on the cheek. It was Miss
Vivian Herbert, who was going away, and she spoke to him softly.

“Good-night, little Lord Fauntleroy,” she said. “Sleep well.”

And in the morning he did not know that he had tried to open his eyes
and had murmured sleepily, “Good-night--I'm so--glad--I saw you--you are
so--pretty----”

He only had a very faint recollection of hearing the gentlemen laugh
again and of wondering why they did it.

No sooner had the last guest left the room, than Mr. Havisham turned
from his place by the fire, and stepped nearer the sofa, where he stood
looking down at the sleeping occupant. Little Lord Fauntleroy was taking
his ease luxuriously. One leg crossed the other and swung over the edge
of the sofa; one arm was flung easily above his head; the warm flush
of healthful, happy, childish sleep was on his quiet face; his waving
tangle of bright hair strayed over the yellow satin cushion. He made a
picture well worth looking at.

As Mr. Havisham looked at it, he put his hand up and rubbed his shaven
chin, with a harassed countenance.

“Well, Havisham,” said the Earl's harsh voice behind him. “What is it?
It is evident something has happened. What was the extraordinary event,
if I may ask?”

Mr. Havisham turned from the sofa, still rubbing his chin.

“It was bad news,” he answered, “distressing news, my lord--the worst of
news. I am sorry to be the bearer of it.”

The Earl had been uneasy for some time during the evening, as he glanced
at Mr. Havisham, and when he was uneasy he was always ill-tempered.

“Why do you look so at the boy!” he exclaimed irritably. “You have been
looking at him all the evening as if--See here now, why should you look
at the boy, Havisham, and hang over him like some bird of ill-omen! What
has your news to do with Lord Fauntleroy?”

“My lord,” said Mr. Havisham, “I will waste no words. My news has
everything to do with Lord Fauntleroy. And if we are to believe it--it
is not Lord Fauntleroy who lies sleeping before us, but only the son of
Captain Errol. And the present Lord Fauntleroy is the son of your son
Bevis, and is at this moment in a lodging-house in London.”

The Earl clutched the arms of his chair with both his hands until the
veins stood out upon them; the veins stood out on his forehead too; his
fierce old face was almost livid.

“What do you mean!” he cried out. “You are mad! Whose lie is this?”

“If it is a lie,” answered Mr. Havisham, “it is painfully like the
truth. A woman came to my chambers this morning. She said your son
Bevis married her six years ago in London. She showed me her marriage
certificate. They quarrelled a year after the marriage, and he paid her
to keep away from him. She has a son five years old. She is an American
of the lower classes,--an ignorant person,--and until lately she did not
fully understand what her son could claim. She consulted a lawyer and
found out that the boy was really Lord Fauntleroy and the heir to the
earldom of Dorincourt; and she, of course, insists on his claims being
acknowledged.”

There was a movement of the curly head on the yellow satin cushion. A
soft, long, sleepy sigh came from the parted lips, and the little boy
stirred in his sleep, but not at all restlessly or uneasily. Not at all
as if his slumber were disturbed by the fact that he was being proved
a small impostor and that he was not Lord Fauntleroy at all and never
would be the Earl of Dorincourt. He only turned his rosy face more on
its side, as if to enable the old man who stared at it so solemnly to
see it better.

The handsome, grim old face was ghastly. A bitter smile fixed itself
upon it.

“I should refuse to believe a word of it,” he said, “if it were not such
a low, scoundrelly piece of business that it becomes quite possible in
connection with the name of my son Bevis. It is quite like Bevis. He was
always a disgrace to us. Always a weak, untruthful, vicious young brute
with low tastes--my son and heir, Bevis, Lord Fauntleroy. The woman is
an ignorant, vulgar person, you say?”

“I am obliged to admit that she can scarcely spell her own name,”
 answered the lawyer. “She is absolutely uneducated and openly mercenary.
She cares for nothing but the money. She is very handsome in a coarse
way, but----”

The fastidious old lawyer ceased speaking and gave a sort of shudder.

The veins on the old Earl's forehead stood out like purple cords.

Something else stood out upon it too--cold drops of moisture. He took
out his handkerchief and swept them away. His smile grew even more
bitter.

“And I,” he said, “I objected to--to the other woman, the mother of
this child” (pointing to the sleeping form on the sofa); “I refused to
recognize her. And yet she could spell her own name. I suppose this is
retribution.”

Suddenly he sprang up from his chair and began to walk up and down the
room. Fierce and terrible words poured forth from his lips. His rage and
hatred and cruel disappointment shook him as a storm shakes a tree. His
violence was something dreadful to see, and yet Mr. Havisham noticed
that at the very worst of his wrath he never seemed to forget the little
sleeping figure on the yellow satin cushion, and that he never once
spoke loud enough to awaken it.

“I might have known it,” he said. “They were a disgrace to me from their
first hour! I hated them both; and they hated me! Bevis was the worse of
the two. I will not believe this yet, though! I will contend against it
to the last. But it is like Bevis--it is like him!”

And then he raged again and asked questions about the woman, about her
proofs, and pacing the room, turned first white and then purple in his
repressed fury.

When at last he had learned all there was to be told, and knew the
worst, Mr. Havisham looked at him with a feeling of anxiety. He looked
broken and haggard and changed. His rages had always been bad for
him, but this one had been worse than the rest because there had been
something more than rage in it.

He came slowly back to the sofa, at last, and stood near it.

“If any one had told me I could be fond of a child,” he said, his harsh
voice low and unsteady, “I should not have believed them. I always
detested children--my own more than the rest. I am fond of this one; he
is fond of me” (with a bitter smile). “I am not popular; I never was.
But he is fond of me. He never was afraid of me--he always trusted me.
He would have filled my place better than I have filled it. I know that.
He would have been an honor to the name.”

He bent down and stood a minute or so looking at the happy, sleeping
face. His shaggy eyebrows were knitted fiercely, and yet somehow he did
not seem fierce at all. He put up his hand, pushed the bright hair back
from the forehead, and then turned away and rang the bell.

When the largest footman appeared, he pointed to the sofa.

“Take”--he said, and then his voice changed a little--“take Lord
Fauntleroy to his room.”




XI

When Mr. Hobbs's young friend left him to go to Dorincourt Castle and
become Lord Fauntleroy, and the grocery-man had time to realize that the
Atlantic Ocean lay between himself and the small companion who had spent
so many agreeable hours in his society, he really began to feel very
lonely indeed. The fact was, Mr. Hobbs was not a clever man nor even a
bright one; he was, indeed, rather a slow and heavy person, and he had
never made many acquaintances. He was not mentally energetic enough
to know how to amuse himself, and in truth he never did anything of an
entertaining nature but read the newspapers and add up his accounts. It
was not very easy for him to add up his accounts, and sometimes it took
him a long time to bring them out right; and in the old days, little
Lord Fauntleroy, who had learned how to add up quite nicely with his
fingers and a slate and pencil, had sometimes even gone to the length
of trying to help him; and, then too, he had been so good a listener and
had taken such an interest in what the newspaper said, and he and Mr.
Hobbs had held such long conversations about the Revolution and the
British and the elections and the Republican party, that it was no
wonder his going left a blank in the grocery store. At first it seemed
to Mr. Hobbs that Cedric was not really far away, and would come back
again; that some day he would look up from his paper and see the little
lad standing in the door-way, in his white suit and red stockings, and
with his straw hat on the back of his head, and would hear him say in
his cheerful little voice: “Hello, Mr. Hobbs! This is a hot day--isn't
it?” But as the days passed on and this did not happen, Mr. Hobbs felt
very dull and uneasy. He did not even enjoy his newspaper as much as he
used to. He would put the paper down on his knee after reading it, and
sit and stare at the high stool for a long time. There were some marks
on the long legs which made him feel quite dejected and melancholy. They
were marks made by the heels of the next Earl of Dorincourt, when he
kicked and talked at the same time. It seems that even youthful earls
kick the legs of things they sit on;--noble blood and lofty lineage do
not prevent it. After looking at those marks, Mr. Hobbs would take
out his gold watch and open it and stare at the inscription: “From
his oldest friend, Lord Fauntleroy, to Mr. Hobbs. When this you see,
remember me.” And after staring at it awhile, he would shut it up with a
loud snap, and sigh and get up and go and stand in the door-way--between
the box of potatoes and the barrel of apples--and look up the street.
At night, when the store was closed, he would light his pipe and walk
slowly along the pavement until he reached the house where Cedric had
lived, on which there was a sign that read, “This House to Let”; and he
would stop near it and look up and shake his head, and puff at his pipe
very hard, and after a while walk mournfully back again.

This went on for two or three weeks before any new idea came to him.
Being slow and ponderous, it always took him a long time to reach a
new idea. As a rule, he did not like new ideas, but preferred old ones.
After two or three weeks, however, during which, instead of getting
better, matters really grew worse, a novel plan slowly and deliberately
dawned upon him. He would go to see Dick. He smoked a great many pipes
before he arrived at the conclusion, but finally he did arrive at it. He
would go to see Dick. He knew all about Dick. Cedric had told him, and
his idea was that perhaps Dick might be some comfort to him in the way
of talking things over.

So one day when Dick was very hard at work blacking a customer's boots,
a short, stout man with a heavy face and a bald head stopped on the
pavement and stared for two or three minutes at the bootblack's sign,
which read:

“PROFESSOR DICK TIPTON CAN'T BE BEAT.”


He stared at it so long that Dick began to take a lively interest in
him, and when he had put the finishing touch to his customer's boots, he
said:

“Want a shine, sir?”

The stout man came forward deliberately and put his foot on the rest.

“Yes,” he said.

Then when Dick fell to work, the stout man looked from Dick to the sign
and from the sign to Dick.

“Where did you get that?” he asked.

“From a friend o' mine,” said Dick,--“a little feller. He guv' me the
whole outfit. He was the best little feller ye ever saw. He's in England
now. Gone to be one o' them lords.”

“Lord--Lord--” asked Mr. Hobbs, with ponderous slowness, “Lord
Fauntleroy--Goin' to be Earl of Dorincourt?”

Dick almost dropped his brush.

“Why, boss!” he exclaimed, “d' ye know him yerself?”

“I've known him,” answered Mr. Hobbs, wiping his warm forehead, “ever
since he was born. We was lifetime acquaintances--that's what WE was.”

It really made him feel quite agitated to speak of it. He pulled the
splendid gold watch out of his pocket and opened it, and showed the
inside of the case to Dick.

“'When this you see, remember me,'” he read. “That was his parting
keepsake to me. 'I don't want you to forget me'--those was his words--I'd
ha' remembered him,” he went on, shaking his head, “if he hadn't given
me a thing an' I hadn't seen hide nor hair on him again. He was a
companion as ANY man would remember.”

“He was the nicest little feller I ever see,” said Dick. “An' as to
sand--I never seen so much sand to a little feller. I thought a heap
o' him, I did,--an' we was friends, too--we was sort o' chums from the
fust, that little young un an' me. I grabbed his ball from under a stage
fur him, an' he never forgot it; an' he'd come down here, he would,
with his mother or his nuss and he'd holler: 'Hello, Dick!' at me,
as friendly as if he was six feet high, when he warn't knee high to a
grasshopper, and was dressed in gal's clo'es. He was a gay little chap,
and when you was down on your luck, it did you good to talk to him.”

“That's so,” said Mr. Hobbs. “It was a pity to make a earl out of HIM.
He would have SHONE in the grocery business--or dry goods either; he
would have SHONE!” And he shook his head with deeper regret than ever.

It proved that they had so much to say to each other that it was not
possible to say it all at one time, and so it was agreed that the next
night Dick should make a visit to the store and keep Mr. Hobbs company.
The plan pleased Dick well enough. He had been a street waif nearly
all his life, but he had never been a bad boy, and he had always had a
private yearning for a more respectable kind of existence. Since he had
been in business for himself, he had made enough money to enable him to
sleep under a roof instead of out in the streets, and he had begun to
hope he might reach even a higher plane, in time. So, to be invited to
call on a stout, respectable man who owned a corner store, and even had
a horse and wagon, seemed to him quite an event.

“Do you know anything about earls and castles?” Mr. Hobbs inquired. “I'd
like to know more of the particklars.”

“There's a story about some on 'em in the Penny Story Gazette,” said
Dick. “It's called the 'Crime of a Coronet; or, The Revenge of the
Countess May.' It's a boss thing, too. Some of us boys 're takin' it to
read.”

“Bring it up when you come,” said Mr. Hobbs, “an' I'll pay for it. Bring
all you can find that have any earls in 'em. If there aren't earls,
markises'll do, or dooks--though HE never made mention of any dooks or
markises. We did go over coronets a little, but I never happened to see
any. I guess they don't keep 'em 'round here.”

“Tiffany 'd have 'em if anybody did,” said Dick, “but I don't know as
I'd know one if I saw it.”

Mr. Hobbs did not explain that he would not have known one if he saw it.
He merely shook his head ponderously.

“I s'pose there is very little call for 'em,” he said, and that ended
the matter.

This was the beginning of quite a substantial friendship. When Dick went
up to the store, Mr. Hobbs received him with great hospitality. He gave
him a chair tilted against the door, near a barrel of apples, and after
his young visitor was seated, he made a jerk at them with the hand in
which he held his pipe, saying:

“Help yerself.”

Then he looked at the story papers, and after that they read and
discussed the British aristocracy; and Mr. Hobbs smoked his pipe very
hard and shook his head a great deal. He shook it most when he pointed
out the high stool with the marks on its legs.

“There's his very kicks,” he said impressively; “his very kicks. I sit
and look at 'em by the hour. This is a world of ups an' it's a world of
downs. Why, he'd set there, an' eat crackers out of a box, an' apples
out of a barrel, an' pitch his cores into the street; an' now he's a
lord a-livin' in a castle. Them's a lord's kicks; they'll be a earl's
kicks some day. Sometimes I says to myself, says I, 'Well, I'll be
jiggered!'”

He seemed to derive a great deal of comfort from his reflections and
Dick's visit. Before Dick went home, they had a supper in the small
back-room; they had crackers and cheese and sardines, and other canned
things out of the store, and Mr. Hobbs solemnly opened two bottles of
ginger ale, and pouring out two glasses, proposed a toast.

“Here's to HIM!” he said, lifting his glass, “an' may he teach 'em a
lesson--earls an' markises an' dooks an' all!”

After that night, the two saw each other often, and Mr. Hobbs was much
more comfortable and less desolate. They read the Penny Story Gazette,
and many other interesting things, and gained a knowledge of the habits
of the nobility and gentry which would have surprised those despised
classes if they had realized it. One day Mr. Hobbs made a pilgrimage
to a book store down town, for the express purpose of adding to their
library. He went to the clerk and leaned over the counter to speak to
him.

“I want,” he said, “a book about earls.”

“What!” exclaimed the clerk.

“A book,” repeated the grocery-man, “about earls.”

“I'm afraid,” said the clerk, looking rather queer, “that we haven't
what you want.”

“Haven't?” said Mr. Hobbs, anxiously. “Well, say markises then--or
dooks.”

“I know of no such book,” answered the clerk.

Mr. Hobbs was much disturbed. He looked down on the floor,--then he
looked up.

“None about female earls?” he inquired.

“I'm afraid not,” said the clerk with a smile.

“Well,” exclaimed Mr. Hobbs, “I'll be jiggered!”

He was just going out of the store, when the clerk called him back and
asked him if a story in which the nobility were chief characters would
do. Mr. Hobbs said it would--if he could not get an entire volume
devoted to earls. So the clerk sold him a book called “The Tower of
London,” written by Mr. Harrison Ainsworth, and he carried it home.

When Dick came they began to read it. It was a very wonderful and
exciting book, and the scene was laid in the reign of the famous English
queen who is called by some people Bloody Mary. And as Mr. Hobbs heard
of Queen Mary's deeds and the habit she had of chopping people's heads
off, putting them to the torture, and burning them alive, he became very
much excited. He took his pipe out of his mouth and stared at Dick, and
at last he was obliged to mop the perspiration from his brow with his
red pocket handkerchief.

“Why, he ain't safe!” he said. “He ain't safe! If the women folks can
sit up on their thrones an' give the word for things like that to be
done, who's to know what's happening to him this very minute? He's no
more safe than nothing! Just let a woman like that get mad, an' no one's
safe!”

“Well,” said Dick, though he looked rather anxious himself; “ye see
this 'ere un isn't the one that's bossin' things now. I know her name's
Victory, an' this un here in the book, her name's Mary.”

“So it is,” said Mr. Hobbs, still mopping his forehead; “so it is. An'
the newspapers are not sayin' anything about any racks, thumb-screws,
or stake-burnin's,--but still it doesn't seem as if 't was safe for him
over there with those queer folks. Why, they tell me they don't keep the
Fourth o' July!”

He was privately uneasy for several days; and it was not until he
received Fauntleroy's letter and had read it several times, both to
himself and to Dick, and had also read the letter Dick got about the
same time, that he became composed again.

But they both found great pleasure in their letters. They read and
re-read them, and talked them over and enjoyed every word of them. And
they spent days over the answers they sent and read them over almost as
often as the letters they had received.

It was rather a labor for Dick to write his. All his knowledge of
reading and writing he had gained during a few months, when he had lived
with his elder brother, and had gone to a night-school; but, being a
sharp boy, he had made the most of that brief education, and had spelled
out things in newspapers since then, and practiced writing with bits of
chalk on pavements or walls or fences. He told Mr. Hobbs all about his
life and about his elder brother, who had been rather good to him after
their mother died, when Dick was quite a little fellow. Their father had
died some time before. The brother's name was Ben, and he had taken
care of Dick as well as he could, until the boy was old enough to sell
newspapers and run errands. They had lived together, and as he grew
older Ben had managed to get along until he had quite a decent place in
a store.

“And then,” exclaimed Dick with disgust, “blest if he didn't go an'
marry a gal! Just went and got spoony an' hadn't any more sense left!
Married her, an' set up housekeepin' in two back rooms. An' a hefty un
she was,--a regular tiger-cat. She'd tear things to pieces when she got
mad,--and she was mad ALL the time. Had a baby just like her,--yell day
'n' night! An' if I didn't have to 'tend it! an' when it screamed, she'd
fire things at me. She fired a plate at me one day, an' hit the baby--
cut its chin. Doctor said he'd carry the mark till he died. A nice
mother she was! Crackey! but didn't we have a time--Ben 'n' mehself 'n'
the young un. She was mad at Ben because he didn't make money faster;
'n' at last he went out West with a man to set up a cattle ranch. An'
hadn't been gone a week 'fore one night, I got home from sellin' my
papers, 'n' the rooms wus locked up 'n' empty, 'n' the woman o' the
house, she told me Minna 'd gone--shown a clean pair o' heels. Some un
else said she'd gone across the water to be nuss to a lady as had a
little baby, too. Never heard a word of her since--nuther has Ben. If
I'd ha' bin him, I wouldn't ha' fretted a bit--'n' I guess he didn't.
But he thought a heap o' her at the start. Tell you, he was spoons on
her. She was a daisy-lookin' gal, too, when she was dressed up 'n' not
mad. She'd big black eyes 'n' black hair down to her knees; she'd make
it into a rope as big as your arm, and twist it 'round 'n' 'round her
head; 'n' I tell you her eyes 'd snap! Folks used to say she was part
_I_tali-un--said her mother or father 'd come from there, 'n' it made
her queer. I tell ye, she was one of 'em--she was!”

He often told Mr. Hobbs stories of her and of his brother Ben, who,
since his going out West, had written once or twice to Dick.

Ben's luck had not been good, and he had wandered from place to place;
but at last he had settled on a ranch in California, where he was at
work at the time when Dick became acquainted with Mr. Hobbs.

“That gal,” said Dick one day, “she took all the grit out o' him. I
couldn't help feelin' sorry for him sometimes.”

They were sitting in the store door-way together, and Mr. Hobbs was
filling his pipe.

“He oughtn't to 've married,” he said solemnly, as he rose to get a
match. “Women--I never could see any use in 'em myself.”

As he took the match from its box, he stopped and looked down on the
counter.

“Why!” he said, “if here isn't a letter! I didn't see it before. The
postman must have laid it down when I wasn't noticin', or the newspaper
slipped over it.”

He picked it up and looked at it carefully.

“It's from HIM!” he exclaimed. “That's the very one it's from!”

He forgot his pipe altogether. He went back to his chair quite excited
and took his pocket-knife and opened the envelope.

“I wonder what news there is this time,” he said.

And then he unfolded the letter and read as follows:

“DORINCOURT CASTLE” My dear Mr. Hobbs

“I write this in a great hury becaus i have something curous to tell you
i know you will be very mutch suprised my dear frend when i tel you. It
is all a mistake and i am not a lord and i shall not have to be an earl
there is a lady whitch was marid to my uncle bevis who is dead and she
has a little boy and he is lord fauntleroy becaus that is the way it is
in England the earls eldest sons little boy is the earl if every
body else is dead i mean if his farther and grandfarther are dead my
grandfarther is not dead but my uncle bevis is and so his boy is lord
Fauntleroy and i am not becaus my papa was the youngest son and my name
is Cedric Errol like it was when i was in New York and all the things
will belong to the other boy i thought at first i should have to give
him my pony and cart but my grandfarther says i need not my grandfarther
is very sorry and i think he does not like the lady but preaps he thinks
dearest and i are sorry because i shall not be an earl i would like to
be an earl now better than i thout i would at first becaus this is a
beautifle castle and i like every body so and when you are rich you can
do so many things i am not rich now becaus when your papa is only the
youngest son he is not very rich i am going to learn to work so that
i can take care of dearest i have been asking Wilkins about grooming
horses preaps i might be a groom or a coachman. The lady brought her
little boy to the castle and my grandfarther and Mr. Havisham talked to
her i think she was angry she talked loud and my grandfarther was angry
too i never saw him angry before i wish it did not make them all mad i
thort i would tell you and Dick right away becaus you would be intrusted
so no more at present with love from

“your old frend

“CEDRIC ERROL (Not lord Fauntleroy).”


Mr. Hobbs fell back in his chair, the letter dropped on his knee, his
pen-knife slipped to the floor, and so did the envelope.

“Well!” he ejaculated, “I am jiggered!”

He was so dumfounded that he actually changed his exclamation. It had
always been his habit to say, “I WILL be jiggered,” but this time he
said, “I AM jiggered.” Perhaps he really WAS jiggered. There is no
knowing.

“Well,” said Dick, “the whole thing's bust up, hasn't it?”

“Bust!” said Mr. Hobbs. “It's my opinion it's a put-up job o' the
British ristycrats to rob him of his rights because he's an American.
They've had a spite agin us ever since the Revolution, an' they're
takin' it out on him. I told you he wasn't safe, an' see what's
happened! Like as not, the whole gover'ment's got together to rob him of
his lawful ownin's.”

He was very much agitated. He had not approved of the change in his
young friend's circumstances at first, but lately he had become more
reconciled to it, and after the receipt of Cedric's letter he had
perhaps even felt some secret pride in his young friend's magnificence.
He might not have a good opinion of earls, but he knew that even in
America money was considered rather an agreeable thing, and if all the
wealth and grandeur were to go with the title, it must be rather hard to
lose it.

“They're trying to rob him!” he said, “that's what they're doing, and
folks that have money ought to look after him.”

And he kept Dick with him until quite a late hour to talk it over, and
when that young man left, he went with him to the corner of the street;
and on his way back he stopped opposite the empty house for some time,
staring at the “To Let,” and smoking his pipe, in much disturbance of
mind.




XII

A very few days after the dinner party at the Castle, almost everybody
in England who read the newspapers at all knew the romantic story of
what had happened at Dorincourt. It made a very interesting story when
it was told with all the details. There was the little American boy who
had been brought to England to be Lord Fauntleroy, and who was said to
be so fine and handsome a little fellow, and to have already made people
fond of him; there was the old Earl, his grandfather, who was so proud
of his heir; there was the pretty young mother who had never been
forgiven for marrying Captain Errol; and there was the strange marriage
of Bevis, the dead Lord Fauntleroy, and the strange wife, of whom no one
knew anything, suddenly appearing with her son, and saying that he was
the real Lord Fauntleroy and must have his rights. All these things were
talked about and written about, and caused a tremendous sensation. And
then there came the rumor that the Earl of Dorincourt was not satisfied
with the turn affairs had taken, and would perhaps contest the claim by
law, and the matter might end with a wonderful trial.

There never had been such excitement before in the county in which
Erleboro was situated. On market-days, people stood in groups and talked
and wondered what would be done; the farmers' wives invited one another
to tea that they might tell one another all they had heard and all
they thought and all they thought other people thought. They related
wonderful anecdotes about the Earl's rage and his determination not to
acknowledge the new Lord Fauntleroy, and his hatred of the woman who was
the claimant's mother. But, of course, it was Mrs. Dibble who could tell
the most, and who was more in demand than ever.

“An' a bad lookout it is,” she said. “An' if you were to ask me, ma'am,
I should say as it was a judgment on him for the way he's treated that
sweet young cre'tur' as he parted from her child,--for he's got that
fond of him an' that set on him an' that proud of him as he's a'most
drove mad by what's happened. An' what's more, this new one's no lady,
as his little lordship's ma is. She's a bold-faced, black-eyed thing,
as Mr. Thomas says no gentleman in livery 'u'd bemean hisself to be gave
orders by; and let her come into the house, he says, an' he goes out of
it. An' the boy don't no more compare with the other one than nothin'
you could mention. An' mercy knows what's goin' to come of it all, an'
where it's to end, an' you might have knocked me down with a feather
when Jane brought the news.”

In fact there was excitement everywhere at the Castle: in the library,
where the Earl and Mr. Havisham sat and talked; in the servants' hall,
where Mr. Thomas and the butler and the other men and women servants
gossiped and exclaimed at all times of the day; and in the stables,
where Wilkins went about his work in a quite depressed state of
mind, and groomed the brown pony more beautifully than ever, and said
mournfully to the coachman that he “never taught a young gen'leman to
ride as took to it more nat'ral, or was a better-plucked one than he
was. He was a one as it were some pleasure to ride behind.”

But in the midst of all the disturbance there was one person who was
quite calm and untroubled. That person was the little Lord Fauntleroy
who was said not to be Lord Fauntleroy at all. When first the state of
affairs had been explained to him, he had felt some little anxiousness
and perplexity, it is true, but its foundation was not in baffled
ambition.

While the Earl told him what had happened, he had sat on a stool holding
on to his knee, as he so often did when he was listening to anything
interesting; and by the time the story was finished he looked quite
sober.

“It makes me feel very queer,” he said; “it makes me feel--queer!”

The Earl looked at the boy in silence. It made him feel queer,
too--queerer than he had ever felt in his whole life. And he felt more
queer still when he saw that there was a troubled expression on the
small face which was usually so happy.

“Will they take Dearest's house from her--and her carriage?” Cedric
asked in a rather unsteady, anxious little voice.

“NO!” said the Earl decidedly--in quite a loud voice, in fact. “They can
take nothing from her.”

“Ah!” said Cedric, with evident relief. “Can't they?”

Then he looked up at his grandfather, and there was a wistful shade in
his eyes, and they looked very big and soft.

“That other boy,” he said rather tremulously--“he will have to--to be
your boy now--as I was--won't he?”

“NO!” answered the Earl--and he said it so fiercely and loudly that
Cedric quite jumped.

“No?” he exclaimed, in wonderment. “Won't he? I thought----”

He stood up from his stool quite suddenly.

“Shall I be your boy, even if I'm not going to be an earl?” he said.
“Shall I be your boy, just as I was before?” And his flushed little face
was all alight with eagerness.

How the old Earl did look at him from head to foot, to be sure! How his
great shaggy brows did draw themselves together, and how queerly his
deep eyes shone under them--how very queerly!

“My boy!” he said--and, if you'll believe it, his very voice was queer,
almost shaky and a little broken and hoarse, not at all what you
would expect an Earl's voice to be, though he spoke more decidedly and
peremptorily even than before,--“Yes, you'll be my boy as long as I
live; and, by George, sometimes I feel as if you were the only boy I had
ever had.”

Cedric's face turned red to the roots of his hair; it turned red with
relief and pleasure. He put both his hands deep into his pockets and
looked squarely into his noble relative's eyes.

“Do you?” he said. “Well, then, I don't care about the earl part at all.
I don't care whether I'm an earl or not. I thought--you see, I thought
the one that was going to be the Earl would have to be your boy, too,
and--and I couldn't be. That was what made me feel so queer.”

The Earl put his hand on his shoulder and drew him nearer.

“They shall take nothing from you that I can hold for you,” he said,
drawing his breath hard. “I won't believe yet that they can take
anything from you. You were made for the place, and--well, you may
fill it still. But whatever comes, you shall have all that I can give
you--all!”

It scarcely seemed as if he were speaking to a child, there was such
determination in his face and voice; it was more as if he were making a
promise to himself--and perhaps he was.

He had never before known how deep a hold upon him his fondness for the
boy and his pride in him had taken. He had never seen his strength and
good qualities and beauty as he seemed to see them now. To his obstinate
nature it seemed impossible--more than impossible--to give up what he
had so set his heart upon. And he had determined that he would not give
it up without a fierce struggle.

Within a few days after she had seen Mr. Havisham, the woman who claimed
to be Lady Fauntleroy presented herself at the Castle, and brought her
child with her. She was sent away. The Earl would not see her, she was
told by the footman at the door; his lawyer would attend to her case.
It was Thomas who gave the message, and who expressed his opinion of her
freely afterward, in the servants' hall. He “hoped,” he said, “as he had
wore livery in 'igh famblies long enough to know a lady when he see one,
an' if that was a lady he was no judge o' females.”

“The one at the Lodge,” added Thomas loftily, “'Merican or no 'Merican,
she's one o' the right sort, as any gentleman 'u'd reckinize with all a
heye. I remarked it myself to Henery when fust we called there.”

The woman drove away; the look on her handsome, common face half
frightened, half fierce. Mr. Havisham had noticed, during his interviews
with her, that though she had a passionate temper, and a coarse,
insolent manner, she was neither so clever nor so bold as she meant to
be; she seemed sometimes to be almost overwhelmed by the position in
which she had placed herself. It was as if she had not expected to meet
with such opposition.

“She is evidently,” the lawyer said to Mrs. Errol, “a person from the
lower walks of life. She is uneducated and untrained in everything, and
quite unused to meeting people like ourselves on any terms of equality.
She does not know what to do. Her visit to the Castle quite cowed her.
She was infuriated, but she was cowed. The Earl would not receive her,
but I advised him to go with me to the Dorincourt Arms, where she is
staying. When she saw him enter the room, she turned white, though she
flew into a rage at once, and threatened and demanded in one breath.”

The fact was that the Earl had stalked into the room and stood, looking
like a venerable aristocratic giant, staring at the woman from under his
beetling brows, and not condescending a word. He simply stared at her,
taking her in from head to foot as if she were some repulsive curiosity.
He let her talk and demand until she was tired, without himself uttering
a word, and then he said:

“You say you are my eldest son's wife. If that is true, and if the proof
you offer is too much for us, the law is on your side. In that case,
your boy is Lord Fauntleroy. The matter will be sifted to the bottom,
you may rest assured. If your claims are proved, you will be provided
for. I want to see nothing of either you or the child so long as I live.
The place will unfortunately have enough of you after my death. You
are exactly the kind of person I should have expected my son Bevis to
choose.”

And then he turned his back upon her and stalked out of the room as he
had stalked into it.

Not many days after that, a visitor was announced to Mrs. Errol, who was
writing in her little morning room. The maid, who brought the message,
looked rather excited; her eyes were quite round with amazement, in
fact, and being young and inexperienced, she regarded her mistress with
nervous sympathy.

“It's the Earl hisself, ma'am!” she said in tremulous awe.

When Mrs. Errol entered the drawing-room, a very tall, majestic-looking
old man was standing on the tiger-skin rug. He had a handsome, grim old
face, with an aquiline profile, a long white mustache, and an obstinate
look.

“Mrs. Errol, I believe?” he said.

“Mrs. Errol,” she answered.

“I am the Earl of Dorincourt,” he said.

He paused a moment, almost unconsciously, to look into her uplifted
eyes. They were so like the big, affectionate, childish eyes he had seen
uplifted to his own so often every day during the last few months, that
they gave him a quite curious sensation.

“The boy is very like you,” he said abruptly.

“It has been often said so, my lord,” she replied, “but I have been glad
to think him like his father also.”

As Lady Lorridaile had told him, her voice was very sweet, and her
manner was very simple and dignified. She did not seem in the least
troubled by his sudden coming.

“Yes,” said the Earl, “he is like--my son--too.” He put his hand up to
his big white mustache and pulled it fiercely. “Do you know,” he said,
“why I have come here?”

“I have seen Mr. Havisham,” Mrs. Errol began, “and he has told me of the
claims which have been made----”

“I have come to tell you,” said the Earl, “that they will be
investigated and contested, if a contest can be made. I have come to
tell you that the boy shall be defended with all the power of the law.
His rights----”

The soft voice interrupted him.

“He must have nothing that is NOT his by right, even if the law can give
it to him,” she said.

“Unfortunately the law can not,” said the Earl. “If it could, it should.
This outrageous woman and her child----”

“Perhaps she cares for him as much as I care for Cedric, my lord,” said
little Mrs. Errol. “And if she was your eldest son's wife, her son is
Lord Fauntleroy, and mine is not.”

She was no more afraid of him than Cedric had been, and she looked at
him just as Cedric would have looked, and he, having been an old tyrant
all his life, was privately pleased by it. People so seldom dared to
differ from him that there was an entertaining novelty in it.

“I suppose,” he said, scowling slightly, “that you would much prefer
that he should not be the Earl of Dorincourt.”

Her fair young face flushed.

“It is a very magnificent thing to be the Earl of Dorincourt, my lord,”
 she said. “I know that, but I care most that he should be what his
father was--brave and just and true always.”

“In striking contrast to what his grandfather was, eh?” said his
lordship sardonically.

“I have not had the pleasure of knowing his grandfather,” replied Mrs.
Errol, “but I know my little boy believes----” She stopped short a
moment, looking quietly into his face, and then she added, “I know that
Cedric loves you.”

“Would he have loved me,” said the Earl dryly, “if you had told him why
I did not receive you at the Castle?”

“No,” answered Mrs. Errol, “I think not. That was why I did not wish him
to know.”

“Well,” said my lord brusquely, “there are few women who would not have
told him.”

He suddenly began to walk up and down the room, pulling his great
mustache more violently than ever.

“Yes, he is fond of me,” he said, “and I am fond of him. I can't say I
ever was fond of anything before. I am fond of him. He pleased me from
the first. I am an old man, and was tired of my life. He has given me
something to live for. I am proud of him. I was satisfied to think of
his taking his place some day as the head of the family.”

He came back and stood before Mrs. Errol.

“I am miserable,” he said. “Miserable!”

He looked as if he was. Even his pride could not keep his voice steady
or his hands from shaking. For a moment it almost seemed as if his deep,
fierce eyes had tears in them. “Perhaps it is because I am miserable
that I have come to you,” he said, quite glaring down at her. “I used
to hate you; I have been jealous of you. This wretched, disgraceful
business has changed that. After seeing that repulsive woman who calls
herself the wife of my son Bevis, I actually felt it would be a relief
to look at you. I have been an obstinate old fool, and I suppose I have
treated you badly. You are like the boy, and the boy is the first object
in my life. I am miserable, and I came to you merely because you are
like the boy, and he cares for you, and I care for him. Treat me as well
as you can, for the boy's sake.”

He said it all in his harsh voice, and almost roughly, but somehow he
seemed so broken down for the time that Mrs. Errol was touched to the
heart. She got up and moved an arm-chair a little forward.

“I wish you would sit down,” she said in a soft, pretty, sympathetic
way. “You have been so much troubled that you are very tired, and you
need all your strength.”

It was just as new to him to be spoken to and cared for in that gentle,
simple way as it was to be contradicted. He was reminded of “the boy”
 again, and he actually did as she asked him. Perhaps his disappointment
and wretchedness were good discipline for him; if he had not been
wretched he might have continued to hate her, but just at present he
found her a little soothing. Almost anything would have seemed pleasant
by contrast with Lady Fauntleroy; and this one had so sweet a face and
voice, and a pretty dignity when she spoke or moved. Very soon, through
the quiet magic of these influences, he began to feel less gloomy, and
then he talked still more.

“Whatever happens,” he said, “the boy shall be provided for. He shall be
taken care of, now and in the future.”

Before he went away, he glanced around the room.

“Do you like the house?” he demanded.

“Very much,” she answered.

“This is a cheerful room,” he said. “May I come here again and talk this
matter over?”

“As often as you wish, my lord,” she replied.

And then he went out to his carriage and drove away, Thomas and Henry
almost stricken dumb upon the box at the turn affairs had taken.




XIII

OF course, as soon as the story of Lord Fauntleroy and the difficulties
of the Earl of Dorincourt were discussed in the English newspapers, they
were discussed in the American newspapers. The story was too interesting
to be passed over lightly, and it was talked of a great deal. There were
so many versions of it that it would have been an edifying thing to buy
all the papers and compare them. Mr. Hobbs read so much about it that he
became quite bewildered. One paper described his young friend Cedric as
an infant in arms,--another as a young man at Oxford, winning all the
honors, and distinguishing himself by writing Greek poems; one said he
was engaged to a young lady of great beauty, who was the daughter of a
duke; another said he had just been married; the only thing, in fact,
which was NOT said was that he was a little boy between seven and eight,
with handsome legs and curly hair. One said he was no relation to
the Earl of Dorincourt at all, but was a small impostor who had sold
newspapers and slept in the streets of New York before his mother
imposed upon the family lawyer, who came to America to look for the
Earl's heir. Then came the descriptions of the new Lord Fauntleroy and
his mother. Sometimes she was a gypsy, sometimes an actress, sometimes a
beautiful Spaniard; but it was always agreed that the Earl of Dorincourt
was her deadly enemy, and would not acknowledge her son as his heir
if he could help it, and as there seemed to be some slight flaw in the
papers she had produced, it was expected that there would be a long
trial, which would be far more interesting than anything ever carried
into court before. Mr. Hobbs used to read the papers until his head was
in a whirl, and in the evening he and Dick would talk it all over. They
found out what an important personage an Earl of Dorincourt was, and
what a magnificent income he possessed, and how many estates he owned,
and how stately and beautiful was the Castle in which he lived; and the
more they learned, the more excited they became.

“Seems like somethin' orter be done,” said Mr. Hobbs. “Things like them
orter be held on to--earls or no earls.”

But there really was nothing they could do but each write a letter to
Cedric, containing assurances of their friendship and sympathy. They
wrote those letters as soon as they could after receiving the news; and
after having written them, they handed them over to each other to be
read.

This is what Mr. Hobbs read in Dick's letter:


“DERE FREND: i got ure letter an Mr. Hobbs got his an we are sory u are
down on ure luck an we say hold on as longs u kin an dont let no one git
ahed of u. There is a lot of ole theves wil make al they kin of u ef u
dont kepe ure i skined. But this is mosly to say that ive not forgot
wot u did fur me an if there aint no better way cum over here an go in
pardners with me. Biznes is fine an ile see no harm cums to u Enny
big feler that trise to cum it over u wil hafter setle it fust with
Perfessor Dick Tipton. So no more at present

“DICK.”


And this was what Dick read in Mr. Hobbs's letter:


“DEAR SIR: Yrs received and wd say things looks bad. I believe its a put
up job and them thats done it ought to be looked after sharp. And what
I write to say is two things. Im going to look this thing up. Keep quiet
and Ill see a lawyer and do all I can And if the worst happens and them
earls is too many for us theres a partnership in the grocery business
ready for you when yure old enough and a home and a friend in

“Yrs truly,

“SILAS HOBBS.”


“Well,” said Mr. Hobbs, “he's pervided for between us, if he aint a
earl.”

“So he is,” said Dick. “I'd ha' stood by him. Blest if I didn't like
that little feller fust-rate.”

The very next morning, one of Dick's customers was rather surprised.
He was a young lawyer just beginning practice--as poor as a very young
lawyer can possibly be, but a bright, energetic young fellow, with sharp
wit and a good temper. He had a shabby office near Dick's stand, and
every morning Dick blacked his boots for him, and quite often they were
not exactly water-tight, but he always had a friendly word or a joke for
Dick.

That particular morning, when he put his foot on the rest, he had an
illustrated paper in his hand--an enterprising paper, with pictures in
it of conspicuous people and things. He had just finished looking it
over, and when the last boot was polished, he handed it over to the boy.

“Here's a paper for you, Dick,” he said; “you can look it over when you
drop in at Delmonico's for your breakfast. Picture of an English
castle in it, and an English earl's daughter-in-law. Fine young woman,
too,--lots of hair,--though she seems to be raising rather a row. You
ought to become familiar with the nobility and gentry, Dick. Begin on
the Right Honorable the Earl of Dorincourt and Lady Fauntleroy. Hello! I
say, what's the matter?”

The pictures he spoke of were on the front page, and Dick was staring at
one of them with his eyes and mouth open, and his sharp face almost pale
with excitement.

“What's to pay, Dick?” said the young man. “What has paralyzed you?”

Dick really did look as if something tremendous had happened. He pointed
to the picture, under which was written:

“Mother of Claimant (Lady Fauntleroy).”

It was the picture of a handsome woman, with large eyes and heavy braids
of black hair wound around her head.

“Her!” said Dick. “My, I know her better 'n I know you!”

The young man began to laugh.

“Where did you meet her, Dick?” he said. “At Newport? Or when you ran
over to Paris the last time?”

Dick actually forgot to grin. He began to gather his brushes and things
together, as if he had something to do which would put an end to his
business for the present.

“Never mind,” he said. “I know her! An I've struck work for this
mornin'.”

And in less than five minutes from that time he was tearing through the
streets on his way to Mr. Hobbs and the corner store.

Mr. Hobbs could scarcely believe the evidence of his senses when he
looked across the counter and saw Dick rush in with the paper in his
hand. The boy was out of breath with running; so much out of breath,
in fact, that he could scarcely speak as he threw the paper down on the
counter.

“Hello!” exclaimed Mr. Hobbs. “Hello! What you got there?”

“Look at it!” panted Dick. “Look at that woman in the picture! That's
what you look at! SHE aint no 'ristocrat, SHE aint!” with withering
scorn. “She's no lord's wife. You may eat me, if it aint Minna--MINNA!
I'd know her anywheres, an' so 'd Ben. Jest ax him.”

Mr. Hobbs dropped into his seat.

“I knowed it was a put-up job,” he said. “I knowed it; and they done it
on account o' him bein' a 'Merican!”

“Done it!” cried Dick, with disgust. “SHE done it, that's who done it.
She was allers up to her tricks; an' I'll tell yer wot come to me,
the minnit I saw her pictur. There was one o' them papers we saw had
a letter in it that said somethin' 'bout her boy, an' it said he had a
scar on his chin. Put them two together--her 'n' that there scar!
Why, that there boy o' hers aint no more a lord than I am! It's BEN'S
boy,--the little chap she hit when she let fly that plate at me.”

Professor Dick Tipton had always been a sharp boy, and earning his
living in the streets of a big city had made him still sharper. He had
learned to keep his eyes open and his wits about him, and it must be
confessed he enjoyed immensely the excitement and impatience of that
moment. If little Lord Fauntleroy could only have looked into the store
that morning, he would certainly have been interested, even if all the
discussion and plans had been intended to decide the fate of some other
boy than himself.

Mr. Hobbs was almost overwhelmed by his sense of responsibility, and
Dick was all alive and full of energy. He began to write a letter to
Ben, and he cut out the picture and inclosed it to him, and Mr. Hobbs
wrote a letter to Cedric and one to the Earl. They were in the midst of
this letter-writing when a new idea came to Dick.

“Say,” he said, “the feller that give me the paper, he's a lawyer. Let's
ax him what we'd better do. Lawyers knows it all.”

Mr. Hobbs was immensely impressed by this suggestion and Dick's business
capacity.

“That's so!” he replied. “This here calls for lawyers.”

And leaving the store in the care of a substitute, he struggled into his
coat and marched down-town with Dick, and the two presented themselves
with their romantic story in Mr. Harrison's office, much to that young
man's astonishment.

If he had not been a very young lawyer, with a very enterprising mind
and a great deal of spare time on his hands, he might not have been so
readily interested in what they had to say, for it all certainly sounded
very wild and queer; but he chanced to want something to do very much,
and he chanced to know Dick, and Dick chanced to say his say in a very
sharp, telling sort of way.

“And,” said Mr. Hobbs, “say what your time's worth a' hour and look into
this thing thorough, and I'LL pay the damage,--Silas Hobbs, corner of
Blank street, Vegetables and Fancy Groceries.”

“Well,” said Mr. Harrison, “it will be a big thing if it turns out
all right, and it will be almost as big a thing for me as for Lord
Fauntleroy; and, at any rate, no harm can be done by investigating.
It appears there has been some dubiousness about the child. The woman
contradicted herself in some of her statements about his age, and
aroused suspicion. The first persons to be written to are Dick's brother
and the Earl of Dorincourt's family lawyer.”

And actually, before the sun went down, two letters had been written and
sent in two different directions--one speeding out of New York harbor on
a mail steamer on its way to England, and the other on a train carrying
letters and passengers bound for California. And the first was addressed
to T. Havisham, Esq., and the second to Benjamin Tipton.

And after the store was closed that evening, Mr. Hobbs and Dick sat in
the back-room and talked together until midnight.




XIV

It is astonishing how short a time it takes for very wonderful things to
happen. It had taken only a few minutes, apparently, to change all the
fortunes of the little boy dangling his red legs from the high stool
in Mr. Hobbs's store, and to transform him from a small boy, living the
simplest life in a quiet street, into an English nobleman, the heir
to an earldom and magnificent wealth. It had taken only a few minutes,
apparently, to change him from an English nobleman into a penniless
little impostor, with no right to any of the splendors he had been
enjoying. And, surprising as it may appear, it did not take nearly so
long a time as one might have expected, to alter the face of everything
again and to give back to him all that he had been in danger of losing.

It took the less time because, after all, the woman who had called
herself Lady Fauntleroy was not nearly so clever as she was wicked; and
when she had been closely pressed by Mr. Havisham's questions about her
marriage and her boy, she had made one or two blunders which had caused
suspicion to be awakened; and then she had lost her presence of mind and
her temper, and in her excitement and anger had betrayed herself still
further. All the mistakes she made were about her child. There seemed
no doubt that she had been married to Bevis, Lord Fauntleroy, and had
quarreled with him and had been paid to keep away from him; but Mr.
Havisham found out that her story of the boy's being born in a certain
part of London was false; and just when they all were in the midst of
the commotion caused by this discovery, there came the letter from the
young lawyer in New York, and Mr. Hobbs's letters also.

What an evening it was when those letters arrived, and when Mr. Havisham
and the Earl sat and talked their plans over in the library!

“After my first three meetings with her,” said Mr. Havisham, “I began
to suspect her strongly. It appeared to me that the child was older
than she said he was, and she made a slip in speaking of the date of
his birth and then tried to patch the matter up. The story these letters
bring fits in with several of my suspicions. Our best plan will be
to cable at once for these two Tiptons,--say nothing about them to
her,--and suddenly confront her with them when she is not expecting it.
She is only a very clumsy plotter, after all. My opinion is that she
will be frightened out of her wits, and will betray herself on the
spot.”

And that was what actually happened. She was told nothing, and Mr.
Havisham kept her from suspecting anything by continuing to have
interviews with her, in which he assured her he was investigating her
statements; and she really began to feel so secure that her spirits rose
immensely and she began to be as insolent as might have been expected.

But one fine morning, as she sat in her sitting-room at the inn called
“The Dorincourt Arms,” making some very fine plans for herself, Mr.
Havisham was announced; and when he entered, he was followed by no less
than three persons--one was a sharp-faced boy and one was a big young
man and the third was the Earl of Dorincourt.

She sprang to her feet and actually uttered a cry of terror. It broke
from her before she had time to check it. She had thought of these
new-comers as being thousands of miles away, when she had ever thought
of them at all, which she had scarcely done for years. She had never
expected to see them again. It must be confessed that Dick grinned a
little when he saw her.

“Hello, Minna!” he said.

The big young man--who was Ben--stood still a minute and looked at her.

“Do you know her?” Mr. Havisham asked, glancing from one to the other.

“Yes,” said Ben. “I know her and she knows me.” And he turned his back
on her and went and stood looking out of the window, as if the sight of
her was hateful to him, as indeed it was. Then the woman, seeing herself
so baffled and exposed, lost all control over herself and flew into
such a rage as Ben and Dick had often seen her in before. Dick grinned
a trifle more as he watched her and heard the names she called them all
and the violent threats she made, but Ben did not turn to look at her.

“I can swear to her in any court,” he said to Mr. Havisham, “and I can
bring a dozen others who will. Her father is a respectable sort of man,
though he's low down in the world. Her mother was just like herself.
She's dead, but he's alive, and he's honest enough to be ashamed of her.
He'll tell you who she is, and whether she married me or not.”

Then he clenched his hand suddenly and turned on her.

“Where's the child?” he demanded. “He's going with me! He is done with
you, and so am I!”

And just as he finished saying the words, the door leading into the
bedroom opened a little, and the boy, probably attracted by the sound of
the loud voices, looked in. He was not a handsome boy, but he had rather
a nice face, and he was quite like Ben, his father, as any one could
see, and there was the three-cornered scar on his chin.

Ben walked up to him and took his hand, and his own was trembling.

“Yes,” he said, “I could swear to him, too. Tom,” he said to the little
fellow, “I'm your father; I've come to take you away. Where's your hat?”

The boy pointed to where it lay on a chair. It evidently rather pleased
him to hear that he was going away. He had been so accustomed to queer
experiences that it did not surprise him to be told by a stranger that
he was his father. He objected so much to the woman who had come a few
months before to the place where he had lived since his babyhood, and
who had suddenly announced that she was his mother, that he was quite
ready for a change. Ben took up the hat and marched to the door.

“If you want me again,” he said to Mr. Havisham, “you know where to find
me.”

He walked out of the room, holding the child's hand and not looking at
the woman once. She was fairly raving with fury, and the Earl was calmly
gazing at her through his eyeglasses, which he had quietly placed upon
his aristocratic, eagle nose.

“Come, come, my young woman,” said Mr. Havisham. “This won't do at all.
If you don't want to be locked up, you really must behave yourself.”

And there was something so very business-like in his tones that,
probably feeling that the safest thing she could do would be to get out
of the way, she gave him one savage look and dashed past him into the
next room and slammed the door.

“We shall have no more trouble with her,” said Mr. Havisham.

And he was right; for that very night she left the Dorincourt Arms and
took the train to London, and was seen no more.


When the Earl left the room after the interview, he went at once to his
carriage.

“To Court Lodge,” he said to Thomas.

“To Court Lodge,” said Thomas to the coachman as he mounted the box;
“an' you may depend on it, things are taking a uniggspected turn.”

When the carriage stopped at Court Lodge, Cedric was in the drawing-room
with his mother.

The Earl came in without being announced. He looked an inch or so
taller, and a great many years younger. His deep eyes flashed.

“Where,” he said, “is Lord Fauntleroy?”

Mrs. Errol came forward, a flush rising to her cheek.

“Is it Lord Fauntleroy?” she asked. “Is it, indeed!”

The Earl put out his hand and grasped hers.

“Yes,” he answered, “it is.”

Then he put his other hand on Cedric's shoulder.

“Fauntleroy,” he said in his unceremonious, authoritative way, “ask your
mother when she will come to us at the Castle.”

Fauntleroy flung his arms around his mother's neck.

“To live with us!” he cried. “To live with us always!”

The Earl looked at Mrs. Errol, and Mrs. Errol looked at the Earl.

His lordship was entirely in earnest. He had made up his mind to waste
no time in arranging this matter. He had begun to think it would suit
him to make friends with his heir's mother.

“Are you quite sure you want me?” said Mrs. Errol, with her soft, pretty
smile.

“Quite sure,” he said bluntly. “We have always wanted you, but we were
not exactly aware of it. We hope you will come.”




XV

Ben took his boy and went back to his cattle ranch in California, and
he returned under very comfortable circumstances. Just before his going,
Mr. Havisham had an interview with him in which the lawyer told him that
the Earl of Dorincourt wished to do something for the boy who might have
turned out to be Lord Fauntleroy, and so he had decided that it would
be a good plan to invest in a cattle ranch of his own, and put Ben in
charge of it on terms which would make it pay him very well, and which
would lay a foundation for his son's future. And so when Ben went away,
he went as the prospective master of a ranch which would be almost as
good as his own, and might easily become his own in time, as indeed it
did in the course of a few years; and Tom, the boy, grew up on it into
a fine young man and was devotedly fond of his father; and they were so
successful and happy that Ben used to say that Tom made up to him for
all the troubles he had ever had.

But Dick and Mr. Hobbs--who had actually come over with the others to
see that things were properly looked after--did not return for some
time. It had been decided at the outset that the Earl would provide for
Dick, and would see that he received a solid education; and Mr. Hobbs
had decided that as he himself had left a reliable substitute in charge
of his store, he could afford to wait to see the festivities which were
to celebrate Lord Fauntleroy's eighth birthday. All the tenantry were
invited, and there were to be feasting and dancing and games in the
park, and bonfires and fire-works in the evening.

“Just like the Fourth of July!” said Lord Fauntleroy. “It seems a pity
my birthday wasn't on the Fourth, doesn't it? For then we could keep
them both together.”

It must be confessed that at first the Earl and Mr. Hobbs were not as
intimate as it might have been hoped they would become, in the interests
of the British aristocracy. The fact was that the Earl had known very
few grocery-men, and Mr. Hobbs had not had many very close acquaintances
who were earls; and so in their rare interviews conversation did
not flourish. It must also be owned that Mr. Hobbs had been rather
overwhelmed by the splendors Fauntleroy felt it his duty to show him.

The entrance gate and the stone lions and the avenue impressed Mr.
Hobbs somewhat at the beginning, and when he saw the Castle, and the
flower-gardens, and the hot-houses, and the terraces, and the peacocks,
and the dungeon, and the armor, and the great staircase, and the
stables, and the liveried servants, he really was quite bewildered. But
it was the picture gallery which seemed to be the finishing stroke.

“Somethin' in the manner of a museum?” he said to Fauntleroy, when he
was led into the great, beautiful room.

“N--no--!” said Fauntleroy, rather doubtfully. “I don't THINK it's a
museum. My grandfather says these are my ancestors.”

“Your aunt's sisters!” ejaculated Mr. Hobbs. “ALL of 'em? Your
great-uncle, he MUST have had a family! Did he raise 'em all?”

And he sank into a seat and looked around him with quite an agitated
countenance, until with the greatest difficulty Lord Fauntleroy managed
to explain that the walls were not lined entirely with the portraits of
the progeny of his great-uncle.

He found it necessary, in fact, to call in the assistance of Mrs.
Mellon, who knew all about the pictures, and could tell who painted them
and when, and who added romantic stories of the lords and ladies who
were the originals. When Mr. Hobbs once understood, and had heard some
of these stories, he was very much fascinated and liked the picture
gallery almost better than anything else; and he would often walk over
from the village, where he staid at the Dorincourt Arms, and would spend
half an hour or so wandering about the gallery, staring at the painted
ladies and gentlemen, who also stared at him, and shaking his head
nearly all the time.

“And they was all earls!” he would say, “er pretty nigh it! An' HE'S
goin' to be one of 'em, an' own it all!”

Privately he was not nearly so much disgusted with earls and their mode
of life as he had expected to be, and it is to be doubted whether his
strictly republican principles were not shaken a little by a closer
acquaintance with castles and ancestors and all the rest of it. At any
rate, one day he uttered a very remarkable and unexpected sentiment:

“I wouldn't have minded bein' one of 'em myself!” he said--which was
really a great concession.

What a grand day it was when little Lord Fauntleroy's birthday arrived,
and how his young lordship enjoyed it! How beautiful the park looked,
filled with the thronging people dressed in their gayest and best, and
with the flags flying from the tents and the top of the Castle! Nobody
had staid away who could possibly come, because everybody was really
glad that little Lord Fauntleroy was to be little Lord Fauntleroy still,
and some day was to be the master of everything. Every one wanted to
have a look at him, and at his pretty, kind mother, who had made so many
friends. And positively every one liked the Earl rather better, and felt
more amiably toward him because the little boy loved and trusted him so,
and because, also, he had now made friends with and behaved respectfully
to his heir's mother. It was said that he was even beginning to be
fond of her, too, and that between his young lordship and his young
lordship's mother, the Earl might be changed in time into quite a
well-behaved old nobleman, and everybody might be happier and better
off.

What scores and scores of people there were under the trees, and in
the tents, and on the lawns! Farmers and farmers' wives in their Sunday
suits and bonnets and shawls; girls and their sweethearts; children
frolicking and chasing about; and old dames in red cloaks gossiping
together. At the Castle, there were ladies and gentlemen who had come to
see the fun, and to congratulate the Earl, and to meet Mrs. Errol.
Lady Lorredaile and Sir Harry were there, and Sir Thomas Asshe and his
daughters, and Mr. Havisham, of course, and then beautiful Miss Vivian
Herbert, with the loveliest white gown and lace parasol, and a circle
of gentlemen to take care of her--though she evidently liked Fauntleroy
better than all of them put together. And when he saw her and ran to her
and put his arm around her neck, she put her arms around him, too, and
kissed him as warmly as if he had been her own favorite little brother,
and she said:

“Dear little Lord Fauntleroy! dear little boy! I am so glad! I am so
glad!”

And afterward she walked about the grounds with him, and let him show
her everything. And when he took her to where Mr. Hobbs and Dick were,
and said to her, “This is my old, old friend Mr. Hobbs, Miss Herbert,
and this is my other old friend Dick. I told them how pretty you were,
and I told them they should see you if you came to my birthday,”--she
shook hands with them both, and stood and talked to them in her
prettiest way, asking them about America and their voyage and their life
since they had been in England; while Fauntleroy stood by, looking up at
her with adoring eyes, and his cheeks quite flushed with delight because
he saw that Mr. Hobbs and Dick liked her so much.

“Well,” said Dick solemnly, afterward, “she's the daisiest gal I
ever saw! She's--well, she's just a daisy, that's what she is, 'n' no
mistake!”

Everybody looked after her as she passed, and every one looked after
little Lord Fauntleroy. And the sun shone and the flags fluttered and
the games were played and the dances danced, and as the gayeties went
on and the joyous afternoon passed, his little lordship was simply
radiantly happy.

The whole world seemed beautiful to him.

There was some one else who was happy, too,--an old man, who, though he
had been rich and noble all his life, had not often been very honestly
happy. Perhaps, indeed, I shall tell you that I think it was because he
was rather better than he had been that he was rather happier. He had
not, indeed, suddenly become as good as Fauntleroy thought him; but, at
least, he had begun to love something, and he had several times found
a sort of pleasure in doing the kind things which the innocent, kind
little heart of a child had suggested,--and that was a beginning. And
every day he had been more pleased with his son's wife. It was true, as
the people said, that he was beginning to like her too. He liked to
hear her sweet voice and to see her sweet face; and as he sat in his
arm-chair, he used to watch her and listen as she talked to her boy; and
he heard loving, gentle words which were new to him, and he began to see
why the little fellow who had lived in a New York side street and known
grocery-men and made friends with boot-blacks, was still so well-bred
and manly a little fellow that he made no one ashamed of him, even when
fortune changed him into the heir to an English earldom, living in an
English castle.

It was really a very simple thing, after all,--it was only that he had
lived near a kind and gentle heart, and had been taught to think kind
thoughts always and to care for others. It is a very little thing,
perhaps, but it is the best thing of all. He knew nothing of earls and
castles; he was quite ignorant of all grand and splendid things; but he
was always lovable because he was simple and loving. To be so is like
being born a king.

As the old Earl of Dorincourt looked at him that day, moving about the
park among the people, talking to those he knew and making his ready
little bow when any one greeted him, entertaining his friends Dick and
Mr. Hobbs, or standing near his mother or Miss Herbert listening to
their conversation, the old nobleman was very well satisfied with him.
And he had never been better satisfied than he was when they went down
to the biggest tent, where the more important tenants of the Dorincourt
estate were sitting down to the grand collation of the day.

They were drinking toasts; and, after they had drunk the health of the
Earl, with much more enthusiasm than his name had ever been greeted with
before, they proposed the health of “Little Lord Fauntleroy.” And if
there had ever been any doubt at all as to whether his lordship was
popular or not, it would have been settled that instant. Such a clamor of
voices, and such a rattle of glasses and applause! They had begun to
like him so much, those warm-hearted people, that they forgot to feel
any restraint before the ladies and gentlemen from the castle, who
had come to see them. They made quite a decent uproar, and one or two
motherly women looked tenderly at the little fellow where he stood, with
his mother on one side and the Earl on the other, and grew quite moist
about the eyes, and said to one another:

“God bless him, the pretty little dear!”

Little Lord Fauntleroy was delighted. He stood and smiled, and made
bows, and flushed rosy red with pleasure up to the roots of his bright
hair.

“Is it because they like me, Dearest?” he said to his mother. “Is it,
Dearest? I'm so glad!”

And then the Earl put his hand on the child's shoulder and said to him:

“Fauntleroy, say to them that you thank them for their kindness.”

Fauntleroy gave a glance up at him and then at his mother.

“Must I?” he asked just a trifle shyly, and she smiled, and so did Miss
Herbert, and they both nodded. And so he made a little step forward,
and everybody looked at him--such a beautiful, innocent little fellow he
was, too, with his brave, trustful face!--and he spoke as loudly as he
could, his childish voice ringing out quite clear and strong.

“I'm ever so much obliged to you!” he said, “and--I hope you'll enjoy my
birthday--because I've enjoyed it so much--and--I'm very glad I'm going
to be an earl; I didn't think at first I should like it, but now I
do--and I love this place so, and I think it is beautiful--and--and--and
when I am an earl, I am going to try to be as good as my grandfather.”

And amid the shouts and clamor of applause, he stepped back with a
little sigh of relief, and put his hand into the Earl's and stood close
to him, smiling and leaning against his side.


And that would be the very end of my story; but I must add one curious
piece of information, which is that Mr. Hobbs became so fascinated
with high life and was so reluctant to leave his young friend that he
actually sold his corner store in New York, and settled in the English
village of Erlesboro, where he opened a shop which was patronized by the
Castle and consequently was a great success. And though he and the
Earl never became very intimate, if you will believe me, that man Hobbs
became in time more aristocratic than his lordship himself, and he read
the Court news every morning, and followed all the doings of the House
of Lords! And about ten years after, when Dick, who had finished his
education and was going to visit his brother in California, asked the
good grocer if he did not wish to return to America, he shook his head
seriously.

“Not to live there,” he said. “Not to live there; I want to be near HIM,
an' sort o' look after him. It's a good enough country for them that's
young an' stirrin'--but there's faults in it. There's not an auntsister
among 'em--nor an earl!”






End of Project Gutenberg's Little Lord Fauntleroy, by Frances Hodgson Burnett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY ***

***** This file should be named 479-0.txt or 479-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/479/

Produced by Charles Keller and David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
