"Princes," said she, "I am of a country too remote from here; and,
besides that, it would be abusing your generosity to oblige you to
travel so far. I must confess that I have left my native country for
ever. I told you that I was a lady of Grand Cairo; but since you have
shewn me so much favour, I should be much in the wrong in concealing the
truth from you: I am a sultan's daughter. A usurper has possessed
himself of my father's throne, after having murdered him, and I have
been forced to fly to save my life."

Codadad and his brothers requested the princess to tell them her story,
and after thanking them for their repeated protestations of readiness to
serve her, she could not refuse to satisfy their curiosity, and began
the recital of her adventures in the following manner.

"There was in a certain island," said the princess, "a great city called
Deryabar, governed by a magnificent and virtuous sultan, who had no
children, which was the only blessing wanting to make him happy. He
continually addressed his prayers to Heaven, but Heaven only partially
granted his requests, for the queen his wife, after a long expectation,
brought forth a daughter.

"I am that unfortunate princess; my father was rather grieved than
pleased at my birth; but he submitted to the will of God, and caused me
to be educated with all possible care, being resolved, since he had no
son, to teach me the art of ruling, that I might supply his place after
his death.

"There was, at the court of Deryabar, an orphan youth of good birth whom
the sultan, my father, had befriended and educated according to his
rank. He was very handsome, and, not wanting ability, found means to
please my father, who conceived a great friendship for him. All the
courtiers perceived it, and guessed that the young man might in the end
be my husband. In this idea, and looking on him already as heir to the
crown, they made their court to him, and every one endeavoured to gain
his favour. He soon saw into their designs, and forgetting the distance
there was between our conditions, flattered himself with the hopes that
my father was fond enough of him to prefer him before all the princes in
the world. He went farther; for the sultan not offering me to him as
soon as he could have wished, he had the boldness to ask me of him.
Whatever punishment his insolence deserved, my father was satisfied with
telling him he had other thoughts in relation to me. The youth was
incensed at this refusal; he resented the contempt, as if he had asked
some maid of ordinary extraction, or as if his birth had been equal to
mine. Nor did he stop here, but resolved to be revenged on the sultan,
and with unparalleled ingratitude conspired against him. In short, he
murdered him, and caused himself to be proclaimed sovereign of Deryabar.
The grand vizier, however, while the usurper was butchering my father
came to carry me away from the palace, and secured me in a friend's
house, till a vessel he had provided was ready to sail. I then left the
island, attended only by a governess and that generous minister, who
chose rather to follow his master's daughter than to submit to a tyrant.

"The grand vizier designed to carry me to the courts of the neighbouring
sultans, to implore their assistance, and excite them to revenge my
father's death; but Heaven did not concur in a resolution we thought so
just. When we had been but a few days at sea, there arose such a furious
storm, that our vessel, carried away by the violence of the winds and
waves, was dashed in pieces against a rock. My governess, the grand
vizier, and all that attended me, were swallowed up by the sea. I lost
my senses; and whether I was thrown upon the coast, or whether Heaven
wrought a miracle for my deliverance, I found myself on shore when my
senses returned.

"In my despair and horror I was on the point of casting myself into the
sea again; when I heard behind me a great noise of men and horses. I
looked about to see what it might be, and espied several armed horsemen,
among whom was one mounted on an Arabian charger. He had on a garment
embroidered with silver, a girdle set with precious stones, and a crown
of gold on his head. Though his habit had not convinced me that he was
chief of the company, I should have judged it by the air of grandeur
which appeared in his person. He was a young man extraordinarily well
shaped, and perfectly beautiful. Surprised to see a young lady alone in
that place, he sent some of his officers to ask who I was. I answered
only by weeping. The shore being covered with the wreck of our ship,
they concluded that I was certainly some person who had escaped from the
vessel. This conjecture excited the curiosity of the officers, who began
to ask me a thousand questions, with assurances that their master was a
generous prince, and that I should receive protection at his court.

"The sultan, impatient to know who I was, grew weary of waiting the
return of his officers, and drew near to me. He gazed on me very
earnestly, and observing that I did not cease weeping, without being
able to return an answer to their questions, he forbade them troubling
me any more; and directing his discourse to me: 'Madam,' said he, 'I
conjure you to moderate your excessive affliction. I dare assure you
that, if your misfortunes are capable of receiving any relief, you shall
find it in my dominions. You shall live with the queen my mother, who
will endeavour by her kindness to ease your affliction. I know not yet
who you are, but I find I already take an interest in your welfare.'

"I thanked the young sultan for his goodness to me, accepted his
obliging offer; and to convince him that I was not unworthy of them,
told him my condition. When I had done speaking, the prince assured me
that he was deeply concerned at my misfortunes. He then conducted me to
his palace, and presented me to the queen his mother, to whom I was
obliged again to repeat my misfortunes. The queen seemed very sensible
of my trouble, and conceived extreme affection for me. On the other
hand, the sultan her son fell desperately in love with me, and soon
offered me his hand and his crown. I was so taken up with the thoughts
of my calamities, that the prince, though so lovely a person, did not
make so great an impression on me as he might have done at another time.
However, gratitude prevailing, I did not refuse to make him happy, and
our nuptials were concluded with all imaginable splendour.

"While the people were taken up with the celebration of their
sovereign's nuptials, a neighbouring prince, his enemy, made a descent
by night on the island with a great number of troops and surprised and
cut to pieces my husband's subjects. We escaped very narrowly, for he
had already entered the palace with some of his followers; but we found
means to slip away and to get to the sea-coast, where we threw ourselves
into a fishing-boat which we had the good fortune to meet with. Two days
we were driven about by the winds, without knowing what would become of
us. The third day we espied a vessel making toward us under sail. We
rejoiced at first, believing it had been a merchant-ship which might
take us aboard; but what was our consternation, when, as it drew near,
we saw ten or twelve armed pirates appear on the deck. Having boarded,
five or six of them leaped into our boat, seized us, bound the prince,
and conveyed us into their ship, where they immediately took off my
veil. My youth and features touched them, and they all declared how much
they were charmed at the sight of me. Instead of casting lots, each of
them claimed the preference, and me as his right. The dispute grew warm,
they came to blows, and fought like madmen. The deck was soon covered
with dead bodies, and they were all killed but one, who, being left sole
possessor of me, said: 'You are mine. I will carry you to Grand Cairo,
to deliver you to a friend of mine, to whom I have promised a beautiful
slave. But who,' added he, looking upon the sultan, my husband, 'is that
man? What relation does he bear to you? Are you allied by blood or
love?' 'Sir,' answered I, 'he is my husband.' 'If so,' replied the
pirate, 'in pity I must rid myself of him: it would be too great an
affliction to him to see you disposed of to another.' Having spoken
these words, he took up the unhappy prince, who was bound, and threw him
into the sea, notwithstanding all my endeavours to prevent him.

"I shrieked in a dreadful manner at the sight of what he had done, and
had certainly cast myself into the sea also, but that the pirate held
me. He saw my design, and therefore bound me with cords to the
main-mast, then hoisting sail, made toward the land, and got ashore. He
unbound me and led me to a little town, where he bought camels, tents,
and slaves, and then set out for Grand Cairo, designing, as he still
said, to present me to his friend, according to his promise.

"We had been several days upon the road, when, as we were crossing this
plain yesterday, we descried the black who inhabited this castle. At a
distance we took him for a tower, and when near us, could scarcely
believe him to be a man. He drew his huge cimeter, and summoned the
pirate to yield himself prisoner, with all his slaves and the lady he
was conducting. You know the end of this dreadful adventure and can
foresee what would have been my fate had you, generous prince, not come
to my deliverance."

[Illustration]

_As it drew near we saw ten or twelve armed pirates appear on the deck._

As soon as the princess had finished the recital of her adventures,
Codadad declared to her that he was deeply concerned at her misfortunes.
"But, madam," added he, "it shall be your own fault if you do not live
at ease for the future. The sultan of Harran's sons offer you a safe
retreat in the court of their father; be pleased to accept of it, and if
you do not disdain the affection of your deliverer, permit me to assure
you of it, and to espouse you before all these princes; let them be
witnesses to our contract." The princess consented, and the marriage was
concluded that very day in the castle, where they found all sorts of
provisions, with an abundance of delicious wine and other liquors.

They all sat down at table; and after having eaten and drunk
plentifully, took with them the rest of the provisions, and set out for
the sultan of Harran's court. They travelled several days, encamping in
the pleasantest places they could find, and were within one day's
journey of Harran, when Codadad, directing his discourse to all his
company, said: "Princes, I have too long concealed from you who I am.
Behold your brother Codadad! I, as well as you, received my being from
the sultan of Harran, the prince of Samaria brought me up, and the
Princess Pirouzè is my mother. Madam," added he, addressing himself to
the princess of Deryabar, "do you also forgive me for having concealed
my birth from you? Perhaps, by discovering it sooner, I might have
prevented some disagreeable reflections, which may have been occasioned
by a match you may have thought unequal." "No, sir," answered the
princess "the opinion I at first conceived of you heightened every
moment and you did not stand in need of the extraction you now discover
to make me happy."

The princes congratulated Codadad on his birth, and expressed much
satisfaction at being made acquainted with it. But in reality, instead
of rejoicing, their hatred of so amiable a brother was increased. They
met together at night, and forgetting that had it not been for the brave
son of Pirouzè they must have been devoured by the black, agreed among
themselves to murder him. "We have no other course to choose," said one
of them, "for the moment our father shall come to understand that this
stranger, of whom he is already so fond, is our brother, he will declare
him his heir, and we shall all be obliged to obey and fall down before
him." He added much more, which made such an impression on their
unnatural minds, that they immediately repaired to Codadad, then asleep,
stabbed him repeatedly, and leaving him for dead in the arms of the
princess of Deryabar, proceeded on their journey to the city of Harran,
where they arrived the next day.

The sultan their father conceived the greater joy at their return,
because he had despaired of ever seeing them again: he asked what had
been the occasion of their stay. But they took care not to acquaint him
with it, making no mention either of the black or of Codadad; and only
said, that being curious to see different countries, they had spent some
time in the neighbouring cities.

In the meantime Codadad lay in his tent weltering in his blood and
little differing from a dead man, with the princess his wife, who seemed
to be in not much better condition than himself. She rent the air with
her dismal shrieks, tore her hair, and bathing her husband's body with
her tears, "Alas! Codadad, my dear Codadad," cried she, "is it you whom
I behold just departing this life? Can I believe these are your brothers
who have treated you so unmercifully, those brothers whom thy valour had
saved? O Heaven! which has condemned me to lead a life of calamities, if
you will not permit me to have a consort, why did you permit me to find
one? Behold, you have now robbed me of two, just as I began to be
attached to them."

By these and other moving expressions the afflicted princess of Deryabar
vented her sorrow, fixing her eyes on the unfortunate Codadad, who could
not hear her; but he was not dead, and his consort, observing that he
still breathed, ran to a large town she espied in the plain, to inquire
for a surgeon. She was directed to one, who went immediately with her;
but when they came to the tent, they could not find Codadad, which made
them conclude he had been dragged away by some wild beast to be
devoured. The princess renewed her complaints and lamentations in a most
affecting manner. The surgeon was moved, and being unwilling to leave
her in so distressed a condition, proposed to her to return to the town,
offering her his house and service.

She suffered herself to be prevailed upon. The surgeon conducted her to
his house, and without knowing, as yet, who she was, treated her with
all imaginable courtesy and respect. He used all his endeavours to
comfort her, but it was vain to think of removing her sorrow. "Madam,"
said he to her one day, "be pleased to recount to me your misfortunes;
tell me your country and your condition. Perhaps I may give you some
good advice, when I am acquainted with all the circumstances of your
calamity."

The surgeon's words were so efficacious, that they wrought on the
princess, who recounted to him all her adventures; and when she had
done, the surgeon directed his discourse to her: "Madam," said he, "you
ought not thus to give way to your sorrow; you ought rather to arm
yourself with resolution, and perform what the duty of a wife requires
of you. You are bound to avenge your husband. If you please, I will wait
on you as your attendant. Let us go to the sultan of Harran's court; he
is a good and a just prince. You need only represent to him in lively
colours, how Prince Codadad has been treated by his brothers. I am
persuaded he will do you justice." "I submit to your reasoning,"
answered the princess; "it is my duty to endeavour to avenge Codadad;
and since you are so generous as to offer to attend me, I am ready to
set out." No sooner had she fixed this resolution, than the surgeon
ordered two camels to be made ready, on which the princess and he
mounted, and repaired to Harran.

They alighted at the first caravanserai they found, and inquired of the
host the news at court. "Deryabar," said he, "is in very great
perplexity. The sultan had a son, who lived long with him as a stranger,
and none can tell what is become of the young prince. One of the
sultan's wives, named Pirouzè, is his mother; she has made all possible
inquiry, but to no purpose. The sultan has forty-nine other sons, all by
different mothers, but not one of them has virtue enough to comfort him
for the death of Codadad; I say, his death, because it is impossible he
should be still alive, since no intelligence has been heard of him,
notwithstanding so much search has been made."

The surgeon, having heard this account from the host, concluded that the
best course the princess of Deryabar could take was to wait upon
Pirouzè; but that step required much precaution: for it was to be feared
that if the sultan of Harran's sons should happen to hear of the arrival
of their sister-in-law and her design, they might cause her to be
conveyed away before she could discover herself. The surgeon weighed all
these circumstances, and therefore, that he might manage matters with
discretion, desired the princess to remain in the caravanserai, whilst
he repaired to the palace, to observe which might be the safest way to
conduct her to Pirouzè.

He went accordingly into the city, and was walking toward the palace,
when he beheld a lady mounted on a mule richly accoutred. She was
followed by several ladies mounted also on mules, with a great number of
guards and black slaves. All the people formed a lane to see her pass
along, and saluted her by prostrating themselves on the ground. The
surgeon paid her the same respect, and then asked a calendar, who
happened to stand by him, whether that lady was one of the sultan's
wives. "Yes, brother," answered the calendar, "she is, and the most
honoured and beloved by the people, because she is the mother of Prince
Codadad, of whom you must have heard."

The surgeon asked no more questions, but followed Pirouzè to a mosque,
into which she went to distribute alms, and assist at the public prayers
which the sultan had ordered to be offered up for the safe return of
Codadad. The surgeon broke through the throng and advanced to Pirouzè's
guards. He waited the conclusion of the prayers, and when the princess
went out, stepped up to one of her slaves, and whispered him in the ear:
"Brother, I have a secret of moment to impart to the Princess Pirouzè:
may not I be introduced into her apartment?" "If that secret," answered
the slave, "relates to Prince Codadad I dare promise you shall have
audience of her; but if it concern not him, it is needless for you to be
introduced; for her thoughts are all engrossed by her son." "It is only
about that dear son," replied the surgeon, "that I wish to speak to
her." "If so," said the slave, "you need but follow us to the palace,
and you shall soon have the opportunity."

Accordingly, as soon as Pirouzè was returned to her apartment, the slave
acquainted her that a person unknown had some important information to
communicate to her, and that it related to Prince Codadad. No sooner had
he uttered these words, than Pirouzè expressed her impatience to see the
stranger. The slave immediately conducted him into the princess's closet
who ordered all her women to withdraw, except two, from whom she
concealed nothing. As soon as she saw the surgeon, she asked him eagerly
what news he had to tell her of Codadad. "Madam," answered the surgeon,
after having prostrated himself on the ground, "I have a long account to
give you, and such as will surprise you." He then related all the
particulars of what had passed between Codadad and his brothers, which
she listened to with eager attention; but when he came to speak of the
murder, the tender mother fainted away on her sofa, as if she had
herself been stabbed like her son. Her two women soon brought her to
herself and the surgeon continued his relation; and when he had
concluded, Pirouzè said to him: "Go back to the princess of Deryabar,
and assure her from me that the sultan shall soon own her for his
daughter-in-law; and as for yourself, your services shall be rewarded as
liberally as they deserve."

When the surgeon was gone, Pirouzè remained on the sofa in such a state
of affliction as may easily be imagined; and yielding to her tenderness
at the recollection of Codadad, "O my son!" said she, "I must never then
expect to see you more! Unfortunate Codadad, why did you leave me?"
While she uttered these words, she wept bitterly, and her two
attendants, moved by her grief, mingled their tears with hers.

Whilst they were all three in this manner vying in affliction, the
sultan came into the closet, and seeing them in this condition, asked
Pirouzè whether she had received any bad news concerning Codadad. "Alas!
sir," said she, "all is over, my son has lost his life, and to add to my
sorrow, I cannot pay him the funeral rites; for, in all probability,
wild beasts have devoured him." She then told him all she had heard from
the surgeon, and did not fail to enlarge on the inhuman manner in which
Codadad had been murdered by his brothers.

The sultan did not give Pirouzè time to finish her relation, but
transported with anger, and giving way to his passion, "Madam," said he
to the princess, "those perfidious wretches who cause you to shed these
tears, and are the occasion of mortal grief to their father, shall soon
feel the punishment due to their guilt." The sultan, having spoken these
words, with indignation in his countenance, went directly to the
presence-chamber, where all his courtiers attended, and such of the
people as had petitions to present to him. They were alarmed to see him
in passion, and thought his anger had been kindled against them. He
ascended the throne, and causing his grand vizier to approach, "Hassan,"
said he, "go immediately, take a thousand of my guards, and seize all
the princes, my sons; shut them up in the tower used as a prison for
murderers, and let this be done in a moment." All who were present
trembled at this extraordinary command; and the grand vizier, without
uttering a word, laid his hand on his head, to express his obedience,
and hastened from the hall to execute his orders. In the meantime the
sultan dismissed those who attended for audience, and declared he would
not hear of any business for a month to come. He was still in the hall
when the vizier returned. "Are all my sons," demanded he, "in the
tower?" "They are, sir," answered the vizier; "I have obeyed your
orders." "This is not all," replied the sultan, "I have farther commands
for you:" and so saying he went out of the hall of audience, and
returned to Pirouzè's apartment, the vizier following him. He asked the
princess where Codadad's widow had taken up her lodging. Pirouzè's women
told him, for the surgeon had not forgotten that in his relation. The
sultan then turning to his minister, "Go," said he, "to this
caravanserai, and conduct a young princess who lodges there, with all
the respect due to her quality, to my palace."

The vizier was not long in performing what he was ordered. He mounted on
horseback with all the emirs and courtiers, and repaired to the
caravanserai, where the princess of Deryabar was lodged, whom he
acquainted with his orders; and presented her, from the sultan, with a
fine white mule, whose saddle and bridle were adorned with gold, rubies,
and diamonds. She mounted, and proceeded to the palace. The surgeon
attended her, mounted on a beautiful Tartar horse which the vizier had
provided for him. All the people were at their windows, or in the
streets, to see the cavalcade; and it being given out that the princess,
whom they conducted in such state to court, was Codadad's wife, the city
resounded with acclamations, the air rung with shouts of joy, which
would have been turned into lamentations had that prince's fatal
adventure been known, so much was he beloved by all.

The princess of Deryabar found the sultan at the palace gate waiting to
receive her: he took her by the hand and led her to Pirouzè's apartment,
where a very moving scene took place. Codadad's wife found her
affliction redouble at the sight of her husband's father and mother; as,
on the other hand, those parents could not look on their son's wife
without being much affected. She cast herself at the sultan's feet, and
having bathed them with tears, was so overcome with grief that she was
not able to speak. Pirouzè was in no better state, and the sultan, moved
by these affecting objects, gave way to his own feelings and wept. At
length the princess of Deryabar, being somewhat recovered, recounted the
adventure of the castle and Codadad's disaster. Then she demanded
justice for the treachery of the princes. "Yes, madam," said the sultan,
"those ungrateful wretches shall perish; but Codadad's death must be
first made public, that the punishment of his brothers may not cause my
subjects to rebel; and though we have not my son's body, we will not
omit paying him the last duties." This said, he directed his discourse
to the vizier, and ordered him to cause to be erected a dome of white
marble, in a delightful plain, in the midst of which the city of Harran
stands. Then he appointed the princess of Deryabar a suitable apartment
in his palace, acknowledging her for his daughter-in-law.

Hassan caused the work to be carried on with such diligence, and
employed so many workmen, that the dome was soon finished. Within it was
erected a tomb, which was covered with gold brocade. When all was
completed, the sultan ordered prayers to be said, and appointed a day
for the obsequies of his son.

On that day all the inhabitants of the city went out upon the plain to
see the ceremony performed. The gate of the dome was then closed, and
all the people returned to the city. Next day there were public prayers
in all the mosques, and the same was continued for eight days
successively. On the ninth the king resolved to cause the princes his
sons to be beheaded. The people, incensed at their cruelty toward
Codadad, impatiently expected to see them executed. The scaffolds were
erecting, but the execution was respited, because, on a sudden,
intelligence was brought that the neighbouring princes who had before
made war on the sultan of Harran, were advancing with more numerous
forces than on the first invasion, and were then not far from the city.
This news gave new cause to lament the loss of Codadad, who had
signalised himself in the former war against the same enemies. The
sultan, nothing dismayed, formed a considerable army, and being too
brave to await the enemies' attack within his walls, marched out to meet
them. They, on their side, being informed that the sultan of Harran was
marching to engage them, halted in the plain, and formed their army.

As soon as the sultan discovered them, he also drew up his forces, and
ranged them in order of battle. The signal was given, and he attacked
them with extraordinary vigour; nor was the opposition inferior. Much
blood was shed on both sides, and the victory long remained dubious; but
at length it seemed to incline to the sultan of Harran's enemies, who,
being more numerous, were upon the point of surrounding him, when a
great body of cavalry appeared on the plain, and approached the two
armies. The sight of this fresh party daunted both sides, neither
knowing what to think of them; but their doubts were soon cleared; for
they fell upon the flank of the sultan of Harran's enemies with such a
furious charge, that they soon broke and routed them. Nor did they stop
here; they pursued them, and cut most of them in pieces.

The sultan of Harran, who had attentively observed all that passed,
admired the bravery of this strange body of cavalry, whose unexpected
arrival had given the victory to his army. But, above all, he was
charmed with their chief, whom he had seen fighting with a more than
ordinary valour. He longed to know the name of the generous hero.
Impatient to see and thank him, he advanced toward him, but perceived he
was coming to prevent him. The two princes drew near, and the sultan of
Harran, discovering Codadad in the brave warrior who had just defeated
his enemies, became motionless with joy and surprise. "Father," said
Codadad to him, "you have sufficient cause to be astonished at the
sudden appearance of a man whom perhaps you concluded to be dead. I
should have been so, had not Heaven preserved me still to serve you
against your enemies." "O my son," cried the sultan, "is it possible
that you are restored to me? Alas! I despaired of seeing you more." So
saying, he stretched out his arms to the young prince, who flew to such
a tender embrace.

"I know all, my son," said the sultan again, after having long held him
in his arms. "I know what return your brothers have made you for
delivering them out of the hands of the black; but you shall be revenged
to-morrow. Let us now go to the palace where your mother, who has shed
so many tears on your account, expects to rejoice with us on the defeat
of our enemies. What a joy will it be to her to be informed that my
victory is your work!" "Sir," said Codadad, "give me leave to ask how
you could know the adventure of the castle? Have any of my brothers,
repenting, owned it to you?" "No," answered the sultan; "the princess of
Deryabar has given us an account of everything, for she is in my palace,
and came thither to demand justice against your brothers." Codadad was
transported with joy, to learn that the princess his wife was at the
court. "Let us go, sir," cried he to his father in rapture, "let us go
to my mother, who waits for us. I am impatient to dry her tears, as well
as those of the princess of Deryabar."

The sultan immediately returned to the city with his army, and
re-entered his palace victorious, amidst the acclamations of the people,
who followed him in crowds, praying to Heaven to prolong his life, and
extolling Codadad to the skies. They found Pirouzè and her
daughter-in-law waiting to congratulate the sultan; but words cannot
express the transports of joy they felt when they saw the young prince
with him: their embraces were mingled with tears of a very different
kind from those they had before shed for him. When they had sufficiently
yielded to all the emotions that the ties of blood and love inspired,
they asked Codadad by what miracle he came to be still alive.

He answered that a peasant mounted on a mule happening accidentally to
come into the tent where he lay senseless, and perceiving him alone and
stabbed in several places, had made him fast on his mule, and carried
him to his house, where he applied to his wounds certain herbs, which
recovered him. "When I found myself well," added he, "I returned thanks
to the peasant, and gave him all the diamonds I had. I then made for the
city of Harran; but being informed by the way that some neighbouring
princes had gathered forces, and were on their march against the
sultan's subjects, I made myself known to the villagers, and stirred
them up to undertake his defence. I armed a great number of young men,
and heading them, happened to arrive at the time when the two armies
were engaged."

When he had done speaking, the sultan said: "Let us return thanks to God
for having preserved Codadad; but it is requisite that the traitors who
would have destroyed him should perish." "Sir," answered the generous
prince, "though they are wicked and ungrateful, consider they are your
own flesh and blood: they are my brothers; I forgive their offence, and
beg you to pardon them." This generosity drew tears from the sultan, who
caused the people to be assembled, and declared Codadad his heir. He
then ordered the princes, who were prisoners, to be brought out loaded
with irons. Pirouzè's son struck off their chains, and embraced them
all successively with as much sincerity and affection as he had done in
the black's castle. The people were charmed with Codadad's generosity,
and loaded him with applause. The surgeon was next nobly rewarded in
requital of the services he had done the princess of Deryabar and the
court of Harran remained thereafter in perfect joy and felicity.




THE STORY OF SINBAD THE VOYAGER


In the reign of the Caliph Haroun-al-Raschid, there lived at Bagdad a
poor porter called Hindbad. One day, when the weather was excessively
hot, he was employed to carry a heavy burden from one end of the town to
the other. Having still a great way to go, he came into a street where a
refreshing breeze blew on his face, and the pavement was sprinkled with
rose water. As he could not desire a better place to rest, he took off
his load, and sat upon it, near a large mansion.

He was much pleased that he stopped in this place; for the agreeable
smell of wood of aloes, and of pastils, that came from the house, mixing
with the scent of the rose-water, completely perfumed the air. Besides,
he heard from within a concert of instrumental music, accompanied with
the harmonious notes of nightingales. This charming melody, and the
smell of savoury dishes, made the porter conclude there was a feast
within. His business seldom leading him that way, he knew not to whom
the mansion belonged; but to satisfy his curiosity he went to some of
the servants, whom he saw standing at the gate in magnificent apparel,
and asked the name of the proprietor. "How," replied one of them, "do
you live in Bagdad, and know not that this is the house of Sinbad the
sailor, that famous voyager, who has sailed round the world?" The
porter, who had heard of this Sinbad's riches, lifted up his eyes to
Heaven, and said, loud enough to be heard: "Almighty creator of all
things, consider the difference between Sinbad and me! I am every day
exposed to fatigues and calamities, and can scarcely get barley-bread
for myself and my family, whilst happy Sinbad expends immense riches and
leads a life of pleasure. What has he done to obtain a lot so agreeable?
And what have I done to deserve one so wretched?"

Whilst the porter was thus indulging his melancholy, a servant came out
of the house, and taking him by the arm, bade him follow him, for
Sinbad, his master, wanted to speak to him.

The servants brought him into a great hall, where a number of people sat
round a table, covered with all sorts of savoury dishes. At the upper
end sat a venerable gentleman, with a long white beard, and behind him
stood a number of officers and domestics, all ready to attend his
pleasure. This personage was Sinbad. The porter, whose fear was
increased at the sight of so many people, and of a banquet so sumptuous,
saluted the company trembling. Sinbad bade him draw near, and seating
him at his right hand, served him himself, and gave him a cup of
excellent wine.

When the repast was over, Sinbad addressed his conversation to Hindbad,
and inquired his name and employment. "My lord," answered he, "my name
is Hindbad." "I am very glad to see you," replied Sinbad; "but I wish to
hear from your own mouth what it was you lately said in the street."
Sinbad had himself heard the porter complain through the window, and
this it was that induced him to have him brought in.

At this request, Hindbad hung down his head in confusion, and replied:
"My lord, I confess that my fatigue put me out of humour, and occasioned
me to utter some indiscreet words, which I beg you to pardon." "Do not
think I am so unjust," resumed Sinbad, "as to resent such a complaint,
but I must rectify your error concerning myself. You think, no doubt,
that I have acquired, without labour and trouble, the ease which I now
enjoy. But do not mistake; I did not attain to this happy condition,
without enduring for several years more trouble of body and mind than
can well be imagined. Yes, gentlemen," he added, speaking to the whole
company, "I can assure you my troubles were so extraordinary, that they
were calculated to discourage the most covetous from undertaking such
voyages as I did, to acquire riches. Perhaps you have never heard a
distinct account of my wonderful adventures; and since I have this
opportunity, I will give you a faithful account of them, not doubting
but it will be acceptable."


THE FIRST VOYAGE

"I inherited from my father considerable property, the greater part of
which I squandered in my youth in dissipation; but I perceived my error,
and reflected that riches were perishable, and quickly consumed by such
ill managers as myself, I further considered, that by my irregular way
of living I wretchedly misspent my time; which is, of all things, the
most valuable. Struck with these reflections, I collected the remains of
my fortune, and sold all my effects by public auction. I then entered
into a contract with some merchants, who traded by sea. I took the
advice of such as I thought most capable, and resolving to improve what
money I had, I embarked with several merchants on board a ship which we
had jointly fitted out.

"We set sail, and steered our course toward the Indies through the
Persian Gulf, which is formed by the coasts of Arabia Felix on the
right, and by those of Persia on the left. At first I was troubled with
sea-sickness, but speedily recovered my health, and was not afterward
subject to that complaint.

"In our voyage we touched at several islands, where we sold or exchanged
our goods. One day, whilst under sail, we were becalmed near a small
island, but little elevated above the level of the water, and resembling
a green meadow. The captain ordered his sails to be furled, and
permitted such persons as were so inclined to land; of which number I
was one.

"But while we were enjoying ourselves in eating and drinking, and
recovering ourselves from the fatigue of the sea, the island on a sudden
trembled, and shook us terribly.

"The motion was perceived on board the ship, and we were called upon to
re-embark speedily, or we should all be lost; for what we took for an
island proved to be the back of a sea monster. The nimblest got into the
sloop, others betook themselves to swimming; but for myself, I was still
upon the back of the creature when he dived into the sea, and I had time
only to catch hold of a piece of wood that we had brought out of the
ship. Meanwhile, the captain, having received those on board who were in
the sloop, and taken up some of those that swam, resolved to improve the
favourable gale that had just risen, and hoisting his sails, pursued his
voyage, so that it was impossible for me to recover the ship.

"Thus was I exposed to the mercy of the waves all the rest of the day
and the following night. By this time I found my strength gone, and
despaired of saving my life, when happily a wave threw me against an
island. The bank was high and rugged; so that I could scarcely have got
up, had it not been for some roots of trees, which chance placed within
reach. Having gained the land, I lay down upon the ground half dead,
until the sun appeared. Then, though I was very feeble, both from hard
labour and want of food, I crept along to find some herbs fit to eat,
and had the good luck not only to procure some, but likewise to discover
a spring of excellent water, which contributed much to recover me. After
this I advanced farther into the island, and at last reached a fine
plain, where at a great distance I perceived some horses feeding. I went
toward them, and as I approached heard the voice of a man, who
immediately appeared, and asked me who I was. I related to him my
adventure, after which, taking me by the hand, he led me into a cave,
where there were several other people, no less amazed to see me than I
was to see them.

"I partook of some provisions which they offered me. I then asked them
what they did in such a desert place, to which they answered, that they
were grooms belonging to the Maha-raja, sovereign of the island, and
that every year, at the same season they brought thither the king's
horses for pasturage. They added, that they were to return home on the
morrow, and had I been one day later, I must have perished, because the
inhabited part of the island was at a great distance, and it would have
been impossible for me to have got thither without a guide.

"Next morning they returned to the capital of the island, took me with
them, and presented me to the Maha-raja. He asked me who I was, and by
what adventure I had come into his dominions. After I had satisfied him,
he told me he was much concerned for my misfortune, and at the same time
ordered that I should want nothing; which commands his officers were so
generous as to see exactly fulfilled.

"Being a merchant, I frequented men of my own profession, and
particularly inquired for those who were strangers, that perchance I
might hear news from Bagdad, or find an opportunity to return. They put
a thousand questions respecting my country; and I, being willing to
inform myself as to their laws and customs, asked them concerning
everything which I thought worth knowing.

"There belongs to this king an island named Cassel. They assured me that
every night a noise of drums was heard there, whence the mariners
fancied that it was the residence of Degial. I determined to visit this
wonderful place, and in my way thither saw fishes of one hundred and two
hundred cubits long, that occasion more fear than hurt, for they are so
timorous, that they will fly upon the rattling of two sticks or boards.
I saw likewise other fish about a cubit in length, that had heads like
owls.

"As I was one day at the port after my return, a ship arrived, and as
soon as she cast anchor, they began to unload her, and the merchants on
board ordered their goods to be carried into the custom-house. As I cast
my eye upon some bales, and looked to the name, I found my own, and
perceived the bales to be the same that I had embarked at Bussorah. I
also knew the captain; but being persuaded that he believed me to be
drowned, I went, and asked him whose bales these were. He replied that
they belonged to a merchant of Bagdad, called Sinbad, who came to sea
with him; but had unfortunately perished on the voyage, and that he had
resolved to trade with the bales, until he met with some of his family,
to whom he might return the profit. 'I am that Sinbad,' said I, 'whom
you thought to be dead, and those bales are mine.'

"When the captain heard me speak thus, 'Heavens!' he exclaimed, 'whom
can we trust in these times? There is no faith left among men. I saw
Sinbad perish with my own eyes, as did also the passengers on board, and
yet you tell me you are that Sinbad. What impudence is this? You tell a
horrible falsehood, in order to possess yourself of what does not
belong to you.' 'Have patience,' replied I; 'do me the favour to hear
what I have to say.' Then I told him how I had escaped, and by what
adventure I met with the grooms of the Maha-raja, who had brought me to
his court.

"The captain was at length persuaded that I was no cheat; for there came
people from his ship who knew me, and expressed much joy at seeing me
alive. At last he recollected me himself, and embracing me, 'Heaven be
praised,' said he, 'for your happy escape. I cannot express the joy it
affords me; there are your goods, take and do with them as you please.'
I thanked him, acknowledged his probity, and offered him part of my
goods as a present, which he generously refused.

"I took out what was most valuable in my bales, and presented them to
the Maha-raja, who, knowing my misfortune, asked me how I came by such
rarities. I acquainted him with the circumstance of their recovery. He
was pleased at my good luck, accepted my present, and in return gave me
one much more considerable. Upon this, I took leave of him, and went
aboard the same ship, after I had exchanged my goods for the commodities
of that country. I carried with me wood of aloes, sandal, camphire,
nutmegs, cloves, pepper, and ginger. We passed by several islands, and
at last arrived at Bussorah, from whence I came to this city, with the
value of one hundred thousand sequins. My family and I received one
another with sincere affection. I bought slaves and a landed estate, and
built a magnificent house. Thus I settled myself, resolving to forget
the miseries I had suffered, and to enjoy the pleasures of life."

Sinbad stopped here, and ordered the musicians to proceed with their
concert, which the story had interrupted. The company continued enjoying
themselves till the evening, when Sinbad sent for a purse of a hundred
sequins, and giving it to the porter, said: "Take this, Hindbad, return
to your home, and come back to-morrow to hear more of my adventures."
The porter went away, astonished at the honour done, and the present
made him. The account of this adventure proved very agreeable to his
wife and children, who did not fail to return thanks to God for what
providence had sent them by the hand of Sinbad.

Hindbad put on his best apparel next day, and returned to the bountiful
traveller, who welcomed him heartily. When all the guests had arrived,
dinner was served. When it was ended, Sinbad, addressing himself to the
company, said, "Gentlemen, be pleased to listen to the adventures of my
second voyage; they deserve your attention even more than those of the
first." Upon this every one held his peace, and Sinbad proceeded.


THE SECOND VOYAGE

"I designed, after my first voyage, to spend the rest of my days at
Bagdad, but it was not long ere I grew weary of an indolent life. My
inclination to trade revived. I bought goods proper for the commerce I
intended, and put to sea a second time with merchants of known probity.
We embarked on board a good ship, and after recommending ourselves to
God, set sail. We traded from island to island, and exchanged
commodities with great profit. One day we landed on an island covered
with several sorts of fruit-trees, but we could see neither man nor
animal. We went to take a little fresh air in the meadows, along the
streams that watered them. Whilst some diverted themselves with
gathering flowers, and others fruits, I took my wine and provisions, and
sat down near a stream betwixt two high trees which formed a thick
shade. I made a good meal, and afterward fell asleep. I cannot tell how
long I slept, but when I awoke the ship was gone.

"I got up and looked around me, but could not see one of the merchants
who landed with me. I perceived the ship under sail, but at such a
distance, that I lost sight of her in a short time.

"In this sad condition, I was ready to die with grief. I cried out in
agony, and threw myself upon the ground, where I lay some time in
despair. I upbraided myself a hundred times for not being content with
the produce of my first voyage, that might have sufficed me all my life.
But all this was in vain, and my repentance came too late.

"At last I resigned myself to the will of God. Not knowing what to do, I
climbed up to the top of a lofty tree, from whence I looked about on all
sides, to see if I could discover anything that could give me hopes.
When I gazed toward the sea I could see nothing but sky and water; but
looking over the land I beheld something white; and coming down, I took
what provision I had left, and went toward it, the distance being so
great that I could not distinguish what it was.

"As I approached, I thought it to be a white dome, of a prodigious
height and extent; and when I came up to it, I touched it, and found it
to be very smooth. I went round to see if it was open on any side, but
saw that it was not, and that there was no climbing up to the top, as it
was so smooth. It was at least fifty paces round.

"By this time the sun was about to set, and all of a sudden the sky
became as dark as if it had been covered with a thick cloud. I was much
astonished at this sudden darkness, but much more when I found it
occasioned by a bird of a monstrous size, that came flying toward me. I
remembered that I had often heard mariners speak of a miraculous bird
called the roc, and conceived that the great dome which I so much
admired must be its egg. As I perceived the roc coming, I crept close to
the egg, so that I had before me one of the bird's legs, which was as
big as the trunk of a tree. I tied myself strongly to it with my turban,
in hopes that next morning she would carry me with her out of this
desert island. After having passed the night in this condition, the bird
flew away as soon as it was daylight, and carried me so high, that I
could not discern the earth; she afterward descended with so much
rapidity that I lost my senses. But when I found myself on the ground, I
speedily untied the knot, and had scarcely done so, when the roc, having
taken up a serpent of a monstrous length in her bill, flew away.

"The spot where she left me was encompassed on all sides by mountains,
that seemed to reach above the clouds, and so steep that there was no
possibility of getting out of the valley. This was a new perplexity: so
that when I compared this place with the desert island from which the
roc had brought me I found that I had gained nothing by the change.

"As I walked through this valley, I perceived it was strewed with
diamonds, some of which were of a surprising bigness. I took pleasure in
looking upon them; but shortly saw at a distance such objects as greatly
diminished my satisfaction, namely, a great number of serpents, so
monstrous, that the least of them was capable of swallowing an elephant.
They retired in the daytime to their dens, where they hid themselves
from the roc, their enemy, and came out only in the night.

"I spent the day in walking about in the valley, resting myself at times
in such places as I thought most convenient. When night came on, I went
into a cave, where I thought I might repose in safety. I secured the
entrance with a great stone to preserve me from the serpents; but not so
far as to exclude the light. I supped on part of my provisions, but the
serpents, which began hissing round me, put me into such extreme fear,
that I could not sleep. When day appeared, the serpents retired, and I
came out of the cave trembling. I can justly say, that I walked upon
diamonds, without feeling any inclination to touch them. At last I sat
down, and notwithstanding my apprehensions, not having closed my eyes
during the night, fell asleep, after having eaten a little more of my
provision. But I had scarcely shut my eyes, when something that fell by
me with a great noise awaked me. This was a large piece of raw meat; and
at the same time I saw several others fall down from the rocks in
different places.

"I had always regarded as fabulous what I had heard sailors and others
relate of the valley of diamonds, and of the stratagems employed by
merchants to obtain jewels from thence; but now I found that they had
stated nothing but truth. For the fact is, that the merchants come to
the neighbourhood of this valley when the eagles have young ones; and,
throwing great joints of meat into the valley, the diamonds upon whose
points they fall stick to them; the eagles, which are stronger in this
country than anywhere else, pounce with great force upon those pieces of
meat, and carry them to their nests on the rocks to feed their young;
the merchants at this time run to the nests, drive off the eagles by
their shouts, and take away the diamonds that stick to the meat.

"Until I perceived the device I had concluded it to be impossible for me
to leave this abyss, which I regarded as my grave; but now I changed my
opinion, and began to think upon the means of my deliverance. I began to
collect the largest diamonds I could find, and put them into the leather
bag in which I used to carry my provisions. I afterward took the
largest of the pieces of meat, tied it close round me with the cloth of
my turban, and then laid myself upon the ground with my face downward,
the bag of diamonds being made fast to my girdle.

"I had scarcely placed myself in this posture when the eagles came. Each
of them seized a piece of meat, and one of the strongest having taken me
up, with the piece of meat to which I was fastened, carried me to his
nest on the top of the mountain. The merchants immediately began their
shouting to frighten the eagles; and when they had obliged them to quit
their prey, one of them came to the nest where I was. He was much
alarmed when he saw me; but recovering himself, instead of inquiring how
I came thither, began to quarrel with me, and asked, why I stole his
goods. 'You will treat me,' replied I, 'with more civility when you know
me better. Do not be uneasy, I have diamonds enough for you and myself,
more than all the other merchants together. What ever they have, they
owe to chance, but I selected for myself in the bottom of the valley
those which you see in this bag.' I had scarcely done speaking, when the
other merchants came crowding about us, much astonished to see me; but
they were much more surprised when I told them my story.

"They conducted me to their encampment, and there having opened my bag,
they were surprised at the largeness of my diamonds, and confessed that
in all the courts which they had visited they had never seen any of such
size and perfection. I prayed the merchant who owned the nest to which I
had been carried (for every merchant had his own), to take as many for
his share as he pleased. He contented himself with one, and that the
least of them; and when I pressed him to take more, 'No,' said he, 'I am
very well satisfied with this, which is valuable enough to save me the
trouble of making any more voyages, and will raise as great a fortune as
I desire.'

"I spent the night with the merchants, to whom I related my story a
second time, for the satisfaction of those who had not heard it. I could
not moderate my joy when I found myself delivered from the danger I have
mentioned. I thought myself in a dream, and could scarcely believe
myself out of danger.

"The merchants had thrown their pieces of meat into the valley for
several days, and each of them being satisfied with the diamonds that
had fallen to his lot, we left the place the next morning and travelled
near high mountains, where there were serpents of a prodigious length,
which we had the good fortune to escape. We took shipping at the first
port we reached, and touched at the isle of Roha, where the trees grow
that yield camphire. This tree is so large, and its branches so thick,
that one hundred men may easily sit under its shade. The juice of which
the camphire is made exudes from a hole bored in the upper part of the
tree, is received in a vessel, where it thickens to a consistency, and
becomes what we call camphire; after the juice is thus drawn out, the
tree withers and dies.

"In this island is also found the rhinoceros, an animal less than the
elephant, but larger than the buffalo. It has a horn upon its nose,
about a cubit in length; this horn is solid, and cleft through the
middle. The rhinoceros fights with the elephant, runs his horn into his
belly, and carries him off upon his head; but the blood and the fat of
the elephant running into his eyes, and making him blind, he falls to
the ground; and then, strange to relate! the roc comes and carries them
both away in her claws, for food for her young ones.

"In this island I exchanged some of my diamonds for merchandise. From
hence we went to other ports, and at last, having touched at several
trading towns of the continent, we landed at Bussorah, from whence I
proceeded to Bagdad. There I immediately gave large presents to the
poor, and lived honourably upon the vast riches I had gained with so
much fatigue."

[Illustration]

_The spot where she left me was encompassed on all sides by mountains
that seemed to reach above the clouds, and so steep that there was no
possibility of getting out of the valley._

Thus Sinbad ended his relation, gave Hindbad another hundred sequins,
and invited him to come the next day to hear the account of the third
voyage.


THE THIRD VOYAGE

"I soon lost the remembrance of the perils I had encountered in my two
former voyages," said Sinbad, "and being in the flower of my age, I grew
weary of living without business, and went from Bagdad to Bussorah with
the richest commodities of the country. There I embarked again with some
merchants. We made a long voyage and touched at several ports, where we
carried on a considerable trade. One day, being out in the main ocean,
we were overtaken by a dreadful tempest, which drove us from our course.
The tempest continued several days, and brought us before the port of an
island, which the captain was very unwilling to enter, but we were
obliged to cast anchor. When we had furled our sails, the captain told
us that this, and some other neighbouring islands, were inhabited by
hairy savages, who would speedily attack us; and, though they were but
dwarfs, yet we must make no resistance, for they were more in number
than the locusts; and if we happened to kill one of them they would all
fall upon us and destroy us.

"We soon found that what he had told us was but too true; an innumerable
multitude of frightful savages, about two feet high, covered all over
with red hair, came swimming towards us, and encompassed our ship. They
spoke to us as they came near, but we understood not their language and
they climbed up the sides of the ship with such agility as surprised us.
They took down our sails, cut the cables, and hauling to the shore, made
us all get out, and afterward carried the ship into another island, from
whence they had come.

"We went forward into the island, where we gathered some fruits and
herbs to prolong our lives as long as we could; but we expected nothing
but death. As we advanced, we perceived at a distance a vast pile of
buildings, and made toward it. We found it to be a palace, elegantly
built, and very lofty, with a gate of ebony, which we forced open. We
entered the court, where we saw before us a large apartment, with a
porch, having on one side a heap of human bones, and on the other a vast
number of roasting spits. We trembled at this spectacle, and being
fatigued with travelling, fell to the ground, seized with deadly
apprehension, and lay a long time motionless.

"The sun set, the gate of the apartment opened with a loud crash, and
there came out the horrible figure of a black man, as tall as a lofty
palm-tree. He had but one eye, and that in the middle of his forehead,
where it looked as red as a burning coal. His fore-teeth were very long
and sharp, and stood out of his mouth, which was as deep as that of a
horse. His upper lip hung down upon his breast. His ears resembled those
of an elephant, and covered his shoulders; and his nails were as long
and crooked as the talons of the greatest birds. At the sight of so
frightful a giant we became insensible, and lay like dead men.

"At last we came to ourselves, and saw him sitting in the porch looking
at us. When he had considered us well, he advanced toward us, and laying
his hand upon me, took me up by the nape of my neck, and turned me round
as a butcher would do a sheep's head. After having examined me, and
perceiving me to be so lean that I had nothing but skin and bone, he let
me go. He took up all the rest one by one, and viewed them in the same
manner. The captain being the fattest, he held him with one hand, as I
would do a sparrow, and thrust a spit through him; he then kindled a
great fire, roasted, and ate him in his apartment for his supper. Having
finished his repast, he returned to his porch, where he lay and fell
asleep, snoring louder than thunder. He slept thus till morning. As to
ourselves, it was not possible for us to enjoy any rest, so that we
passed the night in the most painful apprehension that can be imagined.
When day appeared the giant awoke, got up, went out, and left us in the
palace.

"When we thought him at a distance, we broke the melancholy silence we
had preserved the whole of the night, and filled the palace with our
lamentations and groans.

"We spent the day in traversing the island, supporting ourselves with
fruits and herbs as we had done the day before. In the evening we sought
for some place of shelter, but found none; so that we were forced,
whether we would or not, to go back to the palace.

"The giant failed not to return, and supped once more upon one of our
companions, after which he slept and snored till day, and then went out
and left us as before. Our situation appeared to us so dreadful that
several of my comrades designed to throw themselves into the sea, rather
than die so painful a death, upon which one of the company answered that
it would be much more reasonable to devise some method to rid ourselves
of the monster.

"Having thought of a project for this purpose, I communicated it to my
comrades, who approved it. 'Brethren,' said I, 'you know there is much
timber floating upon the coast; if you will be advised by me, let us
make several rafts capable of bearing us. In the meantime, we will
carry out the design I proposed to you for our deliverance from the
giant, and if it succeed, we may remain here patiently awaiting the
arrival of some ship; but if it happen to miscarry, we will take to our
rafts and put to sea.' My advice was approved, and we made rafts capable
of carrying three persons on each.

"We returned to the palace toward the evening, and the giant arrived
shortly after. We were forced to submit to seeing another of our
comrades roasted, but at last we revenged ourselves on the brutish giant
in the following manner. After he had finished his supper he lay down on
his back and fell asleep. As soon as we heard him snore, according to
his custom, nine of the boldest among us, and myself, took each of us a
spit, and putting the points of them into the fire till they were
burning hot, we thrust them into his eye all at once and blinded him.
The pain made him break out into a frightful yell: he started up, and
stretched out his hands, in order to sacrifice some of us to his rage:
but we ran to such places as he could not reach; and after having sought
for us in vain, he groped for the gate and went out, howling in agony.

"We quitted the palace after the giant and came to the shore, where we
had left our rafts, and put them immediately to sea. We waited till day,
in order to get upon them in case the giant should come toward us with
any guide of his own species; but we hoped if he did not appear by
sunrise, and gave over his howling, which we still heard, that he would
prove to be dead; and if that happened, we resolved to stay in that
island, and not to risk our lives upon the rafts. But day had scarcely
appeared when we perceived our cruel enemy, accompanied with two others
almost of the same size, leading him; and a great number more coming
before him at a quick pace.

"We did not hesitate to take to our rafts, and put to sea with all the
speed we could. The giants, who perceived this, took up great stones,
and running to the shore, entered the water up to the middle, and threw
so exactly that they sunk all the rafts but that I was upon; and all my
companions, except the two with me, were drowned. We rowed with all our
might, and escaped the giants, but when we got out to sea we were
exposed to the mercy of the waves and winds, and spent that night and
the following day under the most painful uncertainty as to our fate; but
next morning we had the good fortune to be thrown upon an island, where
we landed with much joy. We found excellent fruit, which afforded us
great relief and recruited our strength.

"At night we went to sleep on the sea shore; but were awakened by the
noise of a serpent of surprising length and thickness, whose scales made
a rustling noise as he wound himself along. It swallowed up one of my
comrades, notwithstanding his loud cries, and the efforts he made to
extricate himself from it; dashing him several times against the ground,
it crushed him, and we could hear it gnaw and tear the poor wretch's
bones, though we had fled to a considerable distance.

"As we walked about, when day returned, we saw a tall tree, upon which
we designed to pass the following night, for our security; and having
satisfied our hunger with fruit, we mounted it before the dusk had
fallen. Shortly after, the serpent came hissing to the foot of the tree;
raised itself up against the trunk of it, and meeting with my comrade,
who sat lower than I, swallowed him at once, and went off.

"I remained upon the tree till it was day, and then came down, more like
a dead man than one alive, expecting the same fate as my two companions.
This filled me with horror, and I advanced some steps to throw myself
into the sea; but I withstood this dictate of despair, and submitted
myself to the will of God.

"In the meantime I collected a great quantity of small wood, brambles,
and dry thorns, and making them up into faggots, made a wide circle with
them round the tree, and also tied some of them to the branches over my
head. Having done this, when the evening came I shut myself up within
this circle, feeling that I had neglected nothing which could preserve
me from the cruel destiny with which I was threatened. The serpent
failed not to come at the usual hour, and went round the tree, seeking
for an opportunity to devour me, but was prevented by the rampart I had
made; so that he lay till day, like a cat watching in vain for a mouse
that has fortunately reached a place of safety. When day appeared he
retired, but I dared not to leave my fort until the sun arose.

"I felt so much fatigued by the labour to which it had put me, and
suffered so much from the serpent's poisonous breath, that death seemed
more eligible to me than the horrors of such a state. I came down from
the tree, and was going to throw myself into the sea, when God took
compassion on me and I perceived a ship at a considerable distance. I
called as loud as I could, and taking the linen from my turban,
displayed it, that they might observe me. This had the desired effect;
the crew perceived me, and the captain sent his boat for me. As soon as
I came on board, the merchants and seamen flocked about me, to know how
I came into that desert island; and after I had related to them all that
had befallen me, the oldest among them said that they had often heard of
the giants that dwelt in that island, that they were cannibals; and as
to the serpents, they added, that there were abundance of them that hid
themselves by day, and came abroad by night. After having testified
their joy at my escaping so many dangers, they brought me the best of
their provisions; and the captain, seeing that I was in rags, was so
generous as to give me one of his own suits. We continued at sea for
some time, touched at several islands, and at last landed at that of
Salabat, where sandal wood is obtained, which is of great use in
medicine. We entered the port, and came to anchor. The merchants began
to unload their goods, in order to sell or exchange them. In the
meantime, the captain came to me and said: 'Brother, I have here some
goods that belonged to a merchant, who sailed some time on board this
ship, and he being dead, I design to dispose of them for the benefit of
his heirs.' The bales he spoke of lay on the deck, and showing them to
me, he said: 'There are the goods; I hope you will take care to sell
them, and you shall have factorage.' I thanked him for thus affording me
an opportunity of employing myself, because I hated to be idle.

"The clerk of the ship took an account of all the bales, with the names
of the merchants to whom they belonged, and when he asked the captain in
whose name he should enter those he had given me the charge of, 'Enter
them,' said the captain, 'in the name of Sinbad.' I could not hear
myself named without some emotion; and looking steadfastly on the
captain, I knew him to be the person who, in my second voyage, had left
me in the island where I fell asleep.

"I was not surprised that he, believing me to be dead, did not recognise
me. 'Captain,' said I, 'was the merchant's name, to whom those bales
belonged, Sinbad?' 'Yes,' replied he, 'that was his name; he came from
Bagdad, and embarked on board my ship at Bussorah.' 'You believe him,
then, to be dead?' said I. 'Certainly,' answered he. 'No, captain,'
resumed I; 'look at me, and you may know that I am Sinbad.'

"The captain, having considered me attentively, recognised me. 'God be
praised,' said he, embracing me, 'I rejoice that fortune has rectified
my fault. There are your goods, which I always took care to preserve.' I
took them from him, and made him the acknowledgments to which he was
entitled.

"From the isle of Salabat, we went to another, where I furnished myself
with cloves, cinnamon, and other spices. As we sailed from this island,
we saw a tortoise twenty cubits in length and breadth. We observed also
an amphibious animal like a cow, which gave milk; its skin is so hard,
that they usually make bucklers of it.

"In short, after a long voyage I arrived at Bussorah, and from thence
returned to Bagdad, with so much wealth that I knew not its extent. I
gave a great deal to the poor, and bought another considerable estate in
addition to what I had already."

[Illustration]

_Having finished his repast, he returned to his porch, where he lay and
fell asleep, snoring louder than thunder._

Thus Sinbad finished the history of his third voyage; gave another
hundred sequins to Hindbad, and invited him to dinner again the next day
to hear the story of his fourth series of adventures.


THE FOURTH VOYAGE

"The pleasures which I enjoyed after my third voyage had not charms
sufficient to divert me from another. My passion for trade, and my love
of novelty, again prevailed. I therefore settled my affairs, and having
provided a stock of goods fit for the traffic I designed to engage in, I
set out on my journey. I took the route of Persia, travelled over
several provinces, and then arrived at a port, where I embarked. We
hoisted our sails, and touched at several ports of the continent, and
then put out to sea; when we were overtaken by such a sudden gust of
wind, as obliged the captain to lower his yards, and take all other
necessary precautions to prevent the danger that threatened us. But all
was in vain; our endeavours had no effect, the sails were split in a
thousand pieces, and the ship was stranded; several of the merchants and
seamen were drowned, and the cargo was lost.

"I had the good fortune, with several of the merchants and mariners, to
get upon some planks, and we were carried by the current to an island
which lay before us. There we found fruit and spring water, which
preserved our lives. We stayed all night near the place where we had
been cast ashore and next morning, as soon as the sun was up, advancing
into the island, saw some houses, which we approached. As soon as we
drew near, we were encompassed by a great number of negroes, who seized
us and carried us to their respective habitations.

"I, and five of my comrades, were carried to one place; here they made
us sit down, and gave us a certain herb, which they made signs to us to
eat. My comrades, not taking notice that the blacks ate none of it
themselves, thought only of satisfying their hunger, and ate with
greediness. But I, suspecting some trick, would not so much as taste it,
which happened well for me; for in a little time after, I perceived my
companions had lost their senses, and that when they spoke to me, they
knew not what they said.

"The negroes fed us afterward with rice, prepared with oil of
cocoa-nuts; and my comrades, who had lost their reason, ate of it
greedily. I also partook of it, but very sparingly. They gave us that
herb at first on purpose to deprive us of our senses, that we might not
be aware of the sad destiny prepared for us; and they supplied us with
rice to fatten us; for, being cannibals, their design was to eat us as
soon as we grew fat. This accordingly happened, for they devoured my
comrades, who were not sensible of their condition; but my senses being
entire, you may easily guess that instead of growing fat I grew leaner
every day. The fear of death under which I laboured caused me to fall
into a languishing distemper, which proved my safety; for the negroes,
having eaten my companions, seeing me to be withered, and sick, deferred
my death.

"Meanwhile I had much liberty, so that scarcely any notice was taken of
what I did, and this gave me an opportunity one day to get at a distance
from the houses and to make my escape. An old man, who saw me and
suspected my design, called to me as loud as he could to return; but I
redoubled my speed, and quickly got out of sight. At that time there was
none but the old man about the houses, the rest being abroad, and not to
return till night, which was usual with them. Therefore, being sure that
they could not arrive in time enough to pursue me, I went on till night,
when I stopped to rest a little, and to eat some of the provisions I had
secured; but I speedily set forward again, and travelled seven days,
avoiding those places which seemed to be inhabited, and lived for the
most part upon cocoa-nuts, which served me both for meat and drink. On
the eighth day I came near the sea, and saw some white people like
myself, gathering pepper, of which there was great plenty in that place.
This I took to be a good omen, and went to them without any scruple.
They came to meet me as soon as they saw me, and asked me in Arabic who
I was, and whence I came. I was overjoyed to hear them speak in my own
language, and satisfied their curiosity by giving them an account of my
shipwreck, and how I fell into the hands of the negroes. 'Those
negroes,' replied they, 'eat men, and by what miracle did you escape
their cruelty?' I related to them the circumstances I have just
mentioned, at which they were wonderfully surprised.

"I stayed with them till they had gathered their quantity of pepper, and
then sailed with them to the island from whence they had come. They
presented me to their king, who was a good prince. He had the patience
to hear the relation of my adventures; and he afterward gave me clothes,
and commanded care to be taken of me.

"The island was very well peopled, plentiful in everything, and the
capital a place of great trade. This agreeable retreat was very
comfortable to me, after my misfortunes, and the kindness of this
generous prince completed my satisfaction. In a word, there was not a
person more in favour with him than myself; and consequently every man
in court and city sought to oblige me; so that in a very little time I
was looked upon rather as a native than a stranger.

"I observed one thing which to me appeared very extraordinary. All the
people, the king himself not excepted, rode their horses without bridle
or stirrups. This made me one day take the liberty to ask the king how
it came to pass. His Majesty answered, that I talked to him of things
which nobody knew the use of in his dominions.

"I went immediately to a workman, and gave him a model for making the
stock of a saddle. When that was done, I covered it myself with velvet
and leather, and embroidered it with gold. I afterward went to a smith,
who made me a bit, according to the pattern I showed him, and also some
stirrups. When I had all things completed, I presented them to the king,
and put them upon one of his horses. His Majesty mounted immediately,
and was so pleased with them, that he testified his satisfaction by
large presents.

"As I paid my court very constantly to the king, he said to me one day:
'Sinbad, I love thee and I have one thing to demand of thee, which thou
must grant.' 'Sir,' answered I, 'there is nothing but I will do, as a
mark of my obedience to your Majesty.' 'I have a mind thou shouldst
marry,' replied he, 'that so thou mayest stay in my dominions, and think
no more of thy own country.' I durst not resist the prince's will, and
he gave me one of the ladies of his court, noble, beautiful, and rich.
The ceremonies of marriage being over, I went and dwelt with my wife,
and for some time we lived together in perfect harmony. I was not,
however, satisfied with my banishment, therefore designed to make my
escape the first opportunity, and to return to Bagdad.

"At this time the wife of one of my neighbours fell sick, and died. I
went to see and comfort him in his affliction, and finding him absorbed
in sorrow, I said to him as soon as I saw him: 'God preserve you and
grant you a long life.' 'Alas!' replied he, 'how do you think I should
obtain the favour you wish me? I have not above an hour to live.'
'Pray,' said I, 'do not entertain such a melancholy thought; I hope I
shall enjoy your company many years.' 'I wish you,' he replied, 'a long
life; but my days are at an end, for I must be buried this day with my
wife. This is a law which our ancestors established in this island, and
it is always observed. The living husband is interred with the dead
wife, and the living wife with the dead husband. Nothing can save me;
every one must submit to this law.'

"While he was giving me an account of this barbarous custom, the very
relation of which chilled my blood, his kindred, friends, and neighbours
came in a body to assist at the funeral. They dressed the corpse of the
woman in her richest apparel, and all her jewels, as if it had been her
wedding day; then they placed her in an open coffin, and began their
march to the place of burial, the husband walking at the head of the
company. They proceeded to a high mountain, and when they had reached
the place of their destination, they took up a large stone, which
covered the mouth of a deep pit, and let down the corpse with all its
apparel and jewels. Then the husband embracing his kindred and friends,
suffered himself, without resistance, to be put into another open coffin
with a pot of water, and seven small loaves, and was let down in the
same manner. The ceremony being over, the aperture was again covered
with the stone, and the company returned.

"It is needless for me to tell you that I was a melancholy spectator of
this funeral, while the rest were scarcely moved, the custom was to them
so familiar. I could not forbear communicating to the king my sentiment
respecting the practice: 'Sir,' I said, 'I cannot but feel astonished at
the strange usage observed in this country, of burying the living with
the dead. I have been a great traveller, and seen many countries, but
never heard of so cruel a law.' 'What do you mean, Sinbad?' replied the
king: 'it is a common law. I shall be interred with the queen, my wife,
if she die first.' 'But, sir,' said I, 'may I presume to ask your
Majesty, if strangers be obliged to observe this law?' 'Without doubt,'
returned the king; 'they are not exempted, if they be married in this
island.'

"I returned home much depressed by this answer; for the fear of my
wife's dying first and that I should be interred alive with her,
occasioned me very uneasy reflections. But there was no remedy; I must
have patience, and submit to the will of God. I trembled, however, at
every little indisposition of my wife, and, alas! in a little time my
fears were realised, for she fell sick and died.

"The king and all his court expressed their wish to honour the funeral
with their presence, and the most considerable people of the city did
the same. When all was ready for the ceremony, the corpse was put into a
coffin with all her jewels and her most magnificent apparel. The
procession began, and as second actor in this doleful tragedy, I went
next the corpse, with my eyes full of tears, bewailing my deplorable
fate. Before we reached the mountain, I made an attempt to affect the
minds of the spectators: I addressed myself to the king first, and then
to all those that were round me; bowing before them to the earth, and
kissing the border of their garments, I prayed them to have compassion
upon me. 'Consider,' said I, 'that I am a stranger, and ought not to be
subject to this rigorous law, and that I have another wife and children
in my own country.' Although I spoke in the most pathetic manner, no one
was moved by my address; on the contrary, they ridiculed my dread of
death as cowardly, made haste to let my wife's corpse into the pit, and
lowered me down the next moment in an open coffin with a vessel full of
water and seven loaves.

"As I approached the bottom, I discovered by the aid of the little light
that came from above the nature of this subterranean place; it seemed an
endless cavern, and might be about fifty fathoms deep.

"Instead of losing my courage and calling death to my assistance in that
miserable condition, however, I felt still an inclination to live, and
to do all I could to prolong my days. I went groping about, for the
bread and water that was in my coffin, and took some of it. Though the
darkness of the cave was so great that I could not distinguish day and
night, yet I always found my coffin again, and the cave seemed to be
more spacious than it had appeared to be at first. I lived for some days
upon my bread and water, which being all spent, I at last prepared for
death.

"I was offering up my last devotions when I heard something tread, and
breathing or panting as it walked. I advanced toward that side from
whence I heard the noise, and on my approach the creature puffed and
blew harder, as if running away from me. I followed the noise, and the
thing seemed to stop sometimes, but always fled and blew as I
approached. I pursued it for a considerable time, till at last I
perceived a light, resembling a star; I went on, sometimes lost sight of
it, but always found it again, and at last discovered that it came
through a hole in the rock, large enough to admit a man.

"Upon this, I stopped some time to rest, being much fatigued with the
rapidity of my progress: afterward coming up to the hole, I got through,
and found myself upon the seashore. I leave you to guess the excess of
my joy: it was such that I could scarcely persuade myself that the whole
was not a dream.

"But when I was recovered from my surprise, and convinced of the reality
of my escape, I perceived what I had followed to be a creature which
came out of the sea, and was accustomed to enter the cavern when the
tides were high.

"I examined the mountain, and found it to be situated betwixt the sea
and the town, but without any passage to or communication with the
latter; the rocks on the sea side being high and perpendicularly steep.
I prostrated myself on the shore to thank God for this mercy, and
afterward entered the cave again to fetch bread and water, which I ate
by daylight with a better appetite than I had done since my interment in
the dark cavern.

"I returned thither a second time, and groped among the coffins for all
the diamonds, rubies, pearls, gold bracelets, and rich stuffs I could
find; these I brought to the shore, and tying them up neatly into
bales, I laid them together upon the beach, waiting till some ship might
appear.

"After two or three days, I perceived a ship just come out of the
harbour, making for the place where I was. I made a sign with the linen
of my turban, and called to the crew as loud as I could. They heard me,
and sent a boat to bring me on board, when they asked by what misfortune
I came thither; I told them that I had suffered shipwreck two days
before, and made shift to get ashore with the goods they saw. It was
fortunate for me that these people did not consider the place where I
was, nor inquire into the probability of what I told them; but without
hesitation took me on board. When I came to the ship, the captain was so
well pleased to have saved me, and so much taken up with his own
affairs, that he also took the story of my pretended shipwreck upon
trust, and generously refused some jewels which I offered him.

"We passed by several islands, and among others that called the isle of
Bells, about ten days' sail from Serendib, and six from that of Kela,
where we landed. This island produces lead mines, Indian canes, and
excellent camphire.

"The King of the isle of Kela is very rich and powerful, and the isle of
Bells, which is about two days' journey in extent, is also subject to
him. The inhabitants are so barbarous that they still eat human flesh.
After we had finished our traffic in that island, we put to sea again,
and touched at several other ports; at last I arrived happily at Bagdad
with infinite riches. Out of gratitude to God for His mercies, I
contributed liberally toward the support of several mosques, and the
subsistence of the poor, and gave myself up to the society of my kindred
and friends, enjoying myself with them in festivities and amusements."

Here Sinbad finished the relation of his fourth voyage. He made a new
present of one hundred sequins to Hindbad, whom he requested to return
with the rest next day at the same hour to dine with him, and hear the
story of his fifth voyage. Hindbad and the other guests took their leave
and retired. Next morning when they all met, they sat down at table, and
when dinner was over, Sinbad began the relation of his fifth voyage as
follows:


THE FIFTH VOYAGE

"All the troubles and calamities I had undergone," said he, "could not
cure me of my inclination to make new voyages. I therefore bought goods,
departed with them for the best seaport; and that I might not be obliged
to depend upon a captain, but have a ship at my own command, I remained
there till one was built on purpose. When the ship was ready, I went on
board with my goods: but not having enough to load her, I agreed to take
with me several merchants of different nations with their merchandise.

"We sailed with the first fair wind, and after a long navigation, the
first place we touched at was a desert island, where we found an egg of
a roc, equal in size to that I formerly mentioned. There was a young roc
in it just ready to be hatched, and its bill had begun to appear. The
merchants whom I had taken on board, and who landed with me, broke the
egg with hatchets, pulled out the young roc, piecemeal, and roasted it.
I had earnestly entreated them not to meddle with the egg, but they
would not listen to me.

"Scarcely had they finished their repast, when there appeared in the air
at a considerable distance from us two great clouds. The captain whom I
had hired to navigate my ship, said they were the male and female roc
that belonged to the young one and pressed us to re-embark with all
speed, to prevent the misfortune which he saw would otherwise befall us.
We hastened on board, and set sail with all possible expedition.

"In the meantime, the two rocs approached with a frightful noise, which
they redoubled when they saw the egg broken, and their young one gone.
They flew back in the direction they had come, and disappeared for some
time, while we made all the sail we could to endeavour to prevent that
which unhappily befell us.

"They soon returned, and we observed that each of them carried between
its talons rocks of a monstrous size. When they came directly over my
ship, they hovered, and one of them let fall a stone, but by the
dexterity of the steersman it missed us. The other roc, to our
misfortune, threw his burden so exactly upon the middle of the ship, as
to split it into a thousand pieces. The mariners and passengers were all
crushed to death, or sank. I myself was of the number of the latter; but
as I came up again, I fortunately caught hold of a piece of the wreck,
and swimming sometimes with one hand, and sometimes with the other, I
came to an island, and got safely ashore.

"I sat down upon the grass, to recover myself from my fatigue, after
which I went into the island to explore it. I found trees everywhere,
some of them bearing green, and others ripe fruits, and streams of fresh
pure water. I ate of the fruits, which I found excellent; and drank of
the water, which was very good.

"When I was a little advanced into the island, I saw an old man, who
appeared very weak and infirm. He was sitting on the bank of a stream,
and at first I took him to be one who had been shipwrecked like myself.
I went toward him and saluted him, but he only slightly bowed his head.
I asked him why he sat so still, but instead of answering me, he made a
sign for me to take him upon my back, and carry him over the brook,
signifying that it was to gather fruit.

"I believed him really to stand in need of my assistance, took him upon
my back, and having carried him over, bade him get down, and for that
end stooped, that he might get off with ease; but instead of doing so
(which I laugh at every time I think of it) the old man, who to me
appeared quite decrepit, clasped his legs nimbly about my neck. He sat
astride upon my shoulders, and held my throat so tight, that I thought
he would have strangled me, the apprehension of which made me swoon and
fall down.

"Notwithstanding my fainting, the ill-natured old fellow kept fast about
my neck, but opened his legs a little to give me time to recover my
breath. When I had done so, he thrust one of his feet against my
stomach, and struck me so rudely on the side with the other that he
forced me to rise up against my will. Having arisen, he made me walk
under the trees, and forced me now and then to stop, to gather and eat
fruit. He never left me all day, and when I lay down to rest at night,
laid himself down with me, holding always fast about my neck. Every
morning he pushed me to make me awake, and afterward obliged me to get
up and walk, and pressed me with his feet.

"One day I found in my way several dry calabashes that had fallen from a
tree. I took a large one, and after cleaning it, pressed into it some
juice of grapes, which abounded in the island; having filled the
calabash, I put it by in a convenient place, and going thither again
some days after, I tasted it, and found the wine so good, that it soon
made me forget my sorrow, gave me new vigour, and so exhilarated my
spirits, that I began to sing and dance as I walked along.

"The old man, perceiving the effect which this liquor had upon me, and
that I carried him with more ease than before, made me a sign to give
him some of it. I handed him the calabash, and the liquor pleasing his
palate, he drank it all off. There being a considerable quantity of it,
he became intoxicated, and the fumes getting up into his head, he began
to sing after his manner, and to dance, thus loosening his legs from
about me by degrees. Finding that he did not press me as before, I threw
him upon the ground, where he lay without motion; I then took up a great
stone, and crushed him.

"I was extremely glad to be thus freed forever from this troublesome
fellow. I now walked toward the beach, where I met the crew of a ship
that had cast anchor, to take in water. They were surprised to see me,
but more so at hearing the particulars of my adventures. 'You fell,'
said they, 'into the hands of the Old Man of the Sea, and are the first
who ever escaped strangling by his malicious tricks. He never quits
those he has once made himself master of till he has destroyed them, and
he has made this island notorious by the number of men he has slain.'

"After having informed me of these things, they carried me with them to
the ship, and the captain received me with great kindness, when they
told him what had befallen me. He put out again to sea, and after some
days' sail, we arrived at the harbour of a great city.

"One of the merchants who had taken me into his friendship invited me to
go along with him, and carried me to a place appointed for the
accommodation of foreign merchants. He gave me a large bag, and having
recommended me to some people of the town, who used to gather
cocoa-nuts, desired them to take me with them. 'Go,' said he, 'follow
them, and act as you see them do, but do not separate from them,
otherwise you may endanger your life.' Having thus spoken, he gave me
provisions for the journey, and I went with them.

"We came to a thick forest of cocoa-trees, very lofty, with trunks so
smooth that it was not possible to climb to the branches that bore the
fruit. When we entered the forest we saw a great number of apes of
several sizes, who fled as soon as they perceived us, and climbed up to
the top of the trees with surprising swiftness.

"The merchants with whom I was, gathered stones and threw them at the
apes on the trees. I did the same, and the apes out of revenge threw
cocoa-nuts at us so fast, and with such gestures, as sufficiently
testified their anger and resentment. We gathered up the cocoa-nuts, and
from time to time threw stones to provoke the apes; so that by this
stratagem we filled our bags with cocoa-nuts, which it had been
impossible otherwise to have done.

"When we had gathered our number, we returned to the city, where the
merchant who had sent me to the forest gave me the value of the cocoas I
brought: 'Go on,' said he, 'and do the like every day, until you have
got money enough to carry you home.' I thanked him for his advice, and
gradually collected as many cocoa-nuts as produced me a considerable
sum.

"The vessel in which I had come sailed with some merchants who loaded
her with cocoa-nuts. I embarked in her all the nuts I had, and when she
was ready to sail took leave of the merchant who had been so kind to me.

"We sailed toward the islands, where pepper grows in great plenty. From
thence we went to the isle of Comari, where the best species of wood of
aloes grows. I exchanged my cocoa in those two islands for pepper and
wood of aloes, and went with other merchants a pearl-fishing. I hired
divers, who brought me up some that were very large and pure. I embarked
in a vessel that happily arrived at Bussorah; from thence I returned to
Bagdad, where I made vast sums from my pepper, wood of aloes, and
pearls. I gave the tenth of my gains in alms, as I had done upon my
return from my other voyages, and endeavoured to dissipate my fatigues
by amusements of different kinds."

When Sinbad had finished his story, he ordered one hundred sequins to be
given to Hindbad, who retired with the other guests; but next morning
the same company returned to dine; when Sinbad requested their
attention, and gave the following account of his sixth voyage:


THE SIXTH VOYAGE

"You long without doubt to know," said he, "how, after having been
shipwrecked five times, and escaped so many dangers, I could resolve
again to tempt fortune, and expose myself to new hardships. I am,
myself, astonished at my conduct when I reflect upon it, and must
certainly have been actuated by my destiny. But be that as it may, after
a year's rest I prepared for a sixth voyage, notwithstanding the
entreaties of my kindred, who did all in their power to dissuade me.

"Instead of taking my way by the Persian Gulf, I travelled once more
through several provinces of Persia and the Indies, and arrived at a
seaport, where I embarked in a ship, the captain of which was bound on a
long voyage. It was long indeed, for the captain and pilot lost their
course. They, however, at last discovered where they were, but we had no
reason to rejoice at the circumstance. Suddenly we saw the captain quit
his post, uttering loud lamentations. He threw off his turban, pulled
his beard, and beat his head like a madman. We asked him the reason,
and he answered, that he was in the most dangerous place in all the
ocean. 'A rapid current carries the ship along with it,' said he, 'and
we shall all perish in less than a quarter of an hour. Pray to God to
deliver us from this peril; we cannot escape, if He do not take pity on
us.' At these words he ordered the sails to be lowered; but all the
ropes broke, and the ship was carried by the current to the foot of an
inaccessible mountain, where she struck and went to pieces, yet in such
a manner that we saved our lives, our provisions, and the best of our
goods.

"This being over, the captain said to us: 'God has done what pleased
Him. Each of us may dig his grave, and bid the world adieu; for we are
all in so fatal a place, that none shipwrecked here ever returned to
their homes.' His discourse afflicted us sensibly, and we embraced each
other, bewailing our deplorable lot.

"The mountain at the foot of which we were wrecked formed part of the
coast of a very large island. It was covered with wrecks, with human
bones, and with a vast quantity of goods and riches. In all other
places, rivers run from their channels into the sea, but here a river of
fresh water runs out of the sea into a dark cavern, whose entrance is
very high and spacious. What is most remarkable in this place is, that
the stones of the mountain are of crystal, rubies, or other precious
stones. Here is also a sort of fountain of pitch or bitumen, that runs
into the sea, which the fish swallow, and turn into ambergris: and this
the waves throw up on the beach in great quantities. Trees also grow
here, most of which are wood of aloes, equal in goodness to those of
Comari.

"To finish the description of this place, which may well be called a
gulf, since nothing ever returns from it, it is not possible for ships
to get off when once they approach within a certain distance. If they
be driven thither by a wind from the sea, the wind and the current impel
them; and if they come into it when a land-wind blows, the height of the
mountain stops the wind, and occasions a calm, so that the force of the
current carries them ashore: and what completes the misfortune is, that
there is no possibility of ascending the mountain, or of escaping by
sea.

"We continued upon the shore in a state of despair, and expected death
every day. At first we divided our provisions as equally as we could,
and thus every one lived a longer or shorter time, according to his
temperance, and the use he made of his provisions.

"I survived all my companions, yet when I buried the last, I had so
little provision remaining that I thought I could not long endure and I
dug a grave, resolving to lie down in it because there was no one left
to inter me.

"But it pleased God once more to take compassion on me, and put it in my
mind to go to the bank of the river which ran into the great cavern.
Considering its probable course with great attention, I said to myself:
'This river, which runs thus under ground, must somewhere have an issue.
If I make a raft, and leave myself to the current, it will convey me to
some inhabited country, or I shall perish. If I be drowned, I lose
nothing, but only change one kind of death for another.'

"I immediately went to work upon large pieces of timber and cables, for
I had choice of them, and tied them together so strongly that I soon
made a very solid raft. When I had finished, I loaded it with rubies,
emeralds, ambergris, rock-crystal, and bales of rich stuffs. Having
balanced my cargo exactly, and fastened it well to the raft, I went on
board with two oars that I had made, and leaving it to the course of the
river, resigned myself to the will of God.

"As soon as I entered the cavern I lost all light, and the stream
carried me I knew not whither. Thus I floated some days in perfect
darkness, and once found the arch so low, that it very nearly touched my
head, which made me cautious afterward to avoid the like danger. All
this while I ate nothing but what was just necessary to support nature;
yet, notwithstanding my frugality, all my provisions were spent. Then a
pleasing stupor seized upon me. I cannot tell how long it continued; but
when I revived, I was surprised to find myself in an extensive plain on
the brink of a river, where my raft was tied, amidst a great number of
negroes. I got up as soon as I saw them, and saluted them. They spoke to
me, but I did not understand their language. I was so transported with
joy, that I knew not whether I was asleep or awake; but being persuaded
that I was not asleep, I recited aloud the following words in Arabic:
'Call upon the Almighty, He will help thee; thou needest not perplex
thyself about anything else: shut thy eyes, and while thou art asleep,
God will change thy bad fortune into good.'

"One of the blacks, who understood Arabic, hearing me speak thus, came
toward me and said: 'Brother, be not surprised to see us; we are
inhabitants of this country, and came hither to-day to water our fields.
We observed something floating upon the water, and, perceiving your
raft, one of us swam into the river and brought it hither, where we
fastened it, as you see, until you should awake. Pray tell us your
history, for it must be extraordinary; how did you venture yourself into
this river, and whence did you come?' I begged of them first to give me
something to eat, and then I would satisfy their curiosity. They gave me
several sorts of food, and when I had satisfied my hunger, I related all
that had befallen me, which they listened to with attentive surprise. As
soon as I had finished, they told me, by the person who spoke Arabic
and interpreted to them what I said, that it was one of the most
wonderful stories they had ever heard, and that I must go along with
them, and tell it to their king myself; it being too extraordinary to be
related by any other than the person to whom the events had happened.

"They immediately sent for a horse, which was brought in a little time;
and having helped me to mount, some of them walked before to shew the
way, while the rest took my raft and cargo and followed.

"We marched till we came to the capital of Serendib, for it was in that
island I had landed. The blacks presented me to their king; I approached
his throne, and saluted him as I used to do the Kings of the Indies;
that is to say, I prostrated myself at his feet. The prince ordered me
to rise, received me with an obliging air, and made me sit down near
him.

"I related to the king all that I have told you, and his majesty was so
surprised and pleased, that he commanded my adventures to be written in
letters of gold, and laid up in the archives of his kingdom. At last my
raft was brought in, and the bales opened in his presence: he admired
the quantity of wood of aloes and ambergris; but, above all, the rubies
and emeralds, for he had none in his treasury that equalled them.

"Observing that he looked on my jewels with pleasure, I fell prostrate
at his feet, and took the liberty to say to him: 'Sir, not only my
person is at your majesty's service, but the cargo of the raft, and I
would beg of you to dispose of it as your own.' He answered me with a
smile: 'Sinbad, I will take care not to covet anything of yours, or to
take anything from you that God has given you; far from lessening your
wealth, I design to augment it, and will not let you quit my dominions
without marks of my liberality.' He then charged one of his officers to
take care of me, and ordered people to serve me at his own expense. The
officer was very faithful in the execution of his commission, and caused
all the goods to be carried to the lodgings provided for me.

"I went every day at a set hour to make my court to the king, and spent
the rest of my time in viewing the city, and what was most worthy of
notice.

"The capital of Serendib stands at the end of a fine valley, in the
middle of the island, encompassed by mountains the highest in the world.
Rubies and several sorts of minerals abound, and the rocks are for the
most part composed of a metalline stone made use of to cut and polish
other precious stones. All kinds of rare plants and trees grow there,
especially cedars and cocoa-nut. There is also a pearl-fishing in the
mouth of its principal river; and in some of its valleys are found
diamonds. I made, by way of devotion, a pilgrimage to the place where
Adam was confined after his banishment from Paradise, and had the
curiosity to go to the top of the mountain.

"When I returned to the city, I prayed the king to allow me to return to
my own country, and he granted me permission in the most honourable
manner. He would needs force a rich present upon me; and when I went to
take my leave of him, he gave me one much more considerable, and at the
same time charged me with a letter for the Commander of the Faithful,
our sovereign, saying to me: 'I pray you give this present from me, and
this letter, to the Caliph, and assure him of my friendship.' I took the
present and letter and promised his majesty punctually to execute the
commission with which he was pleased to honour me.

"The letter from the King of Serendib was written on the skin of a
certain animal of great value, because of its being so scarce, and of a
yellowish colour. The characters of this letter were of azure, and the
contents as follows:

  "'The King of the Indies, before whom march one hundred elephants, who
  lives in a palace that shines with one hundred thousand rubies, and
  who has in his treasury twenty thousand crowns enriched with diamonds,
  to Caliph Haroun-al-Raschid:--

  "'Though the present we send you be inconsiderable, receive it,
  however, as a brother, in consideration of the hearty friendship which
  we bear for you, and of which we are willing to give you proof. We
  desire the same part in your friendship, considering that we believe
  it to be our merit, being of the same dignity with yourself. We
  conjure you this in quality of a brother. Adieu.'

"The present consisted, first, of one single ruby made into a cup, about
half a foot high, an inch thick, and filled with round pearls of half a
drachm each. 2. The skin of a serpent, whose scales were as large as an
ordinary piece of gold, and had the virtue to preserve from sickness
those who lay upon it. 3. Fifty thousand drachms of the best wood of
aloes, with thirty grains of camphire as big as pistachios. And, 4. A
female slave of ravishing beauty, whose apparel was all covered over
with jewels.

"The ship set sail, and after a very successful navigation we landed at
Bussorah, and from thence I went to Bagdad, where the first thing I did
was to acquit myself of my commission.

"I took the king of Serendib's letter and went to present myself at the
gate of the Commander of the Faithful, followed by the beautiful slave,
and such of my own family as carried the gifts. I stated the reason of
my coming, and was immediately conducted to the throne of the caliph. I
made my reverence, and, after a short speech, gave him the letter and
present. When he had read what the king of Serendib wrote to him, he
asked me if the prince were really so rich and potent as he represented
himself in his letter. I prostrated myself a second time, and rising
again, said: 'Commander of the Faithful, I can assure your majesty he
doth not exceed the truth. Nothing is more worthy of admiration than the
magnificence of his palace. When the prince appears in public he has a
throne fixed on the back of an elephant, and marches betwixt two ranks
of his ministers, favourites, and other people of his court; before him,
upon the same elephant, an officer carries a golden lance in his hand;
and behind the throne there is another, who stands upright, with a
column of gold, on the top of which is an emerald half a foot long and
an inch thick; before him march a guard of one thousand men, clad in
cloth of gold and silk, and mounted on elephants richly caparisoned.

"While the king is on his march, the officer who is before him on the
same elephant cries from time to time, with a loud voice: 'Behold the
great monarch, the potent and redoubtable Sultan of the Indies, whose
palace is covered with one hundred thousand rubies, and who possesses
twenty thousand crowns of diamonds. Behold the monarch greater than
Solomon, and the powerful Maha-raja.' After he has pronounced those
words, the officer behind the throne cries in his turn: 'This monarch,
so great and so powerful, must die, must die, must die.' And the officer
before replies: 'Praise be to him who liveth for ever.'

"Furthermore, the King of Serendib is so just that there are no judges
in his dominions. His people have no need of them. They understand and
observe justice rigidly of themselves.'

"The caliph was much pleased with my account. 'The wisdom of that king,'
said he, 'appears in his letter, and after what you tell me, I must
confess, that his wisdom is worthy of his people, and his people deserve
so wise a prince.' Having spoken thus, he dismissed me, and sent me home
with a rich present."

Sinbad left off, and his company retired, Hindbad having first received
one hundred sequins; and next day they returned to hear the relation of
his seventh and last voyage.


THE SEVENTH AND LAST VOYAGE

"Being returned from my sixth voyage," said Sinbad, "I absolutely laid
aside all thoughts of travelling; for, besides that my age now required
rest, I was resolved no more to expose myself to such risks as I had
encountered; so that I thought of nothing but to pass the rest of my
days in tranquillity. One day, however, as I was treating my friends,
one of my servants came and told me that an officer of the caliph's
inquired for me. I rose from table, and went to him. 'The caliph,' said
he, 'has sent me to tell you that he must speak with you.' I followed
the officer to the palace, where, being presented to the caliph, I
saluted him by prostrating myself at his feet. 'Sinbad,' said he to me,
'I stand in need of your service; you must carry my answer and present
to the King of Serendib. It is but just I should return his civility.'

"This command of the caliph was to me like a clap of thunder. 'Commander
of the Faithful,' I replied, 'I am ready to do whatever your majesty
shall think fit to command; but I beseech you most humbly to consider
what I have undergone. I have also made a vow never to go out of
Bagdad.' Hence I took occasion to give him a full and particular account
of all my adventures, which he had the patience to hear out.

"As soon as I had finished, 'I confess,' said he, 'that the things you
tell me are very extraordinary, yet you must for my sake undertake this
voyage which I propose to you. You will only have to go to the isle of
Serendib, and deliver the commission which I give you, for you know it
would not comport with my dignity to be indebted to the king of that
island.' Perceiving that the caliph insisted upon my compliance, I
submitted, and told him that I was willing to obey. He was very well
pleased, and ordered me one thousand sequins for the expenses of my
journey.

"I prepared for my departure in a few days, and as soon as the caliph's
letter and present were delivered to me, I went to Bussorah, where I
embarked, and had a very happy voyage. Having arrived at the isle of
Serendib, I acquainted the king's ministers with my commission, and
prayed them to get me speedy audience. They did so, and I was conducted
to the palace, where I saluted the king by prostration, according to
custom. That prince knew me immediately, and testified very great joy at
seeing me, 'Sinbad,' said he, 'you are welcome; I have many times
thought of you since you departed; I bless the day on which we see one
another once more.' I made my compliments to him, and after having
thanked him for his kindness, delivered the caliph's letter and present,
which he received with all imaginable satisfaction.

"The caliph's present was a complete suit of cloth of gold, valued at
one thousand sequins; fifty robes of rich stuff, a hundred of white
cloth, the finest of Cairo, Suez, and Alexandria; a vessel of agate
broader than deep, an inch thick, and half a foot wide, the bottom of
which represented in bas-relief a man with one knee on the ground, who
held a bow and an arrow, ready to discharge at a lion. He sent him also
a rich tablet, which, according to tradition, belonged to the great
Solomon. The caliph's letter was as follows:

  "'Greeting, in the name of the sovereign guide of the right way, from
  the dependant on God, Haroun-al-Raschid, whom God hath set in the
  place of vicegerent to his prophet, after his ancestors of happy
  memory, to the potent and esteemed Raja of Serendib:--

  'We received your letter with joy, and send you this from our imperial
  residence, the garden of superior wits. We hope when you look upon it,
  you will perceive our good intention and be pleased with it. Adieu.'

"The King of Serendib was highly gratified that the caliph answered his
friendship. A little time after this audience, I solicited leave to
depart, and had much difficulty to obtain it. I procured it, however, at
last, and the king, when he dismissed me, made me a very considerable
present. I embarked immediately to return to Bagdad, but had not the
good fortune to arrive there so speedily as I had hoped. God ordered it
otherwise.

"Three or four days after my departure, we were attacked by corsairs,
who easily seized upon our ship, because it was no vessel of force. Some
of the crew offered resistance, which cost them their lives. But for
myself and the rest, who were not so imprudent, the corsairs saved us on
purpose to make slaves of us.

"We were all stripped, and instead of our own clothes, they gave us
sorry rags, and carried us into a remote island, where they sold us.

"I fell into the hands of a rich merchant, who, as soon as he bought me,
carried me to his house, treated me well, and clad me handsomely for a
slave. Some days after, not knowing who I was, he asked me if I
understood any trade. I answered, that I was no mechanic, but a
merchant, and that the corsairs who sold me, had robbed me of all I
possessed. 'But tell me,' replied he, 'can you shoot with a bow?' I
answered, that the bow was one of my exercises in my youth. He gave me a
bow and arrows, and, taking me behind him upon an elephant, carried me
to a thick forest some leagues from the town. We penetrated a great way
into the wood, and he bade me alight; then, shewing me a great tree,
'Climb up that,' said he, 'and shoot at the elephants as you see them
pass by, for there is a prodigious number of them in this forest, and if
any of them fall, come and give me notice.' Having spoken this, he left
me victuals, and returned to the town, and I continued upon the tree all
night.

"I saw no elephant during the night, but next morning, as soon as the
sun was up, I perceived a great number. I shot several arrows among
them, and at last one of the elephants fell, when the rest retired
immediately, and left me at liberty to go and acquaint my patron with my
booty. When I had informed him, he gave me a good meal, commended my
dexterity, and caressed me highly. We went afterwards together to the
forest, where we dug a hole for the elephant; my patron designing to
return when it had fallen to pieces and take its teeth to trade with.

"I continued this employment for two months, and killed an elephant
every day, getting sometimes upon one tree, and sometimes upon another.
One morning, as I looked for the elephants, I perceived with extreme
amazement that, instead of passing by me across the forest as usual,
they stopped, and came to me with a horrible noise, in such number that
the plain was covered, and shook under them. They encompassed the tree
in which I was concealed, with their trunks extended, and all fixed
their eyes upon me. At this alarming spectacle I continued immovable,
and was so much terrified, that my bow and arrows fell out of my hand.

"My fears were not without cause; for after the elephants had stared
upon me some time, one of the largest of them put his trunk round the
foot of the tree, plucked it up, and threw it on the ground. I fell with
the tree; and the elephant, taking me up with his trunk, laid me on his
back, where I sat more like one dead than alive, with my quiver on my
shoulder. He put himself afterward at the head of the rest, who followed
him in troops, carried me a considerable way, then laid me down on the
ground, and retired with all his companions. After having lain some
time, and seeing the elephants gone, I got up, and found I was upon a
long and broad hill, almost covered with the bones and teeth of
elephants. I confess to you, that this object furnished me with
abundance of reflections. I admired the instinct of those animals; I
doubted not but that was their burying-place, and that they carried me
thither on purpose to tell me that I should forbear to persecute them,
since I did it only for their teeth. I did not stay on the hill, but
turned toward the city, and, after having travelled a day and a night, I
came to my patron.

"As soon as he saw me, 'Ah, poor Sinbad,' exclaimed he, 'I was in great
trouble to know what was become of you. I have been at the forest, where
I found a tree newly pulled up, and a bow and arrows on the ground, and
I despaired of ever seeing you more. Pray tell me what befell you, and
by what good chance you are still alive.' I satisfied his curiosity, and
going both of us next morning to the hill, he found to his great joy
that what I had told him was true. We loaded the elephant which had
carried us with as many teeth as he could bear; and when we were
returned, 'Brother,' said my patron, 'for I will treat you no more as my
slave, after having made such a discovery as will enrich me, God bless
you with all happiness and prosperity. I declare before Him, that I give
you your liberty. I concealed from you what I am now going to tell you.

"'The elephants of our forest have every year killed a great many
slaves, whom we sent to seek ivory. God has delivered you from their
fury, and has bestowed that favour upon you only. It is a sign that He
loves you, and has some use for your service in the world. You have
procured me incredible wealth. Formerly we could not procure ivory but
by exposing the lives of our slaves, and now our whole city is enriched
by your means. I could engage all our inhabitants to contribute toward
making your fortune, but I will have the glory of doing it myself.'

"To this obliging declaration I replied: 'Patron, God preserve you. Your
giving me my liberty is enough to discharge what you owe me, and I
desire no other reward for the service I had the good fortune to do to
you, and your city, but leave to return to my own country.' 'Very well,'
said he, 'the monsoon will in a little time bring ships for ivory. I
will then send you home, and give you wherewith to bear your charges.' I
thanked him again for my liberty and his good intentions toward me. I
stayed with him expecting the monsoon; and during that time, we made so
many journeys to the hill that we filled all our warehouses with ivory.
The other merchants, who traded in it, did the same, for it could not be
long concealed from them.

"The ships arrived at last, and my patron, himself having made choice of
the ship wherein I was to embark, loaded half of it with ivory on my
account, laid in provisions in abundance for my passage, and besides
obliged me to accept a present of some curiosities of the country of
great value. After I had returned him a thousand thanks for all his
favours, I went aboard. We set sail, and as the adventure which procured
me this liberty was very extraordinary, I had it continually in my
thoughts.

"We stopped at some islands to take in fresh provisions. Our vessel
being come to a port on the main land in the Indies, we touched there,
and not being willing to venture by sea to Bussorah, I landed my
proportion of the ivory, resolving to proceed on my journey by land. I
made vast sums by my ivory, bought several rarities for presents, and
when my equipage was ready, set out in company with a large caravan of
merchants. I was a long time on the way, and suffered much, but endured
all with patience, when I considered that I had nothing to fear from the
seas, from pirates, from serpents, or from the other perils to which I
had been exposed.

"All these fatigues ended at last, and I arrived safe at Bagdad. I went
immediately to wait upon the caliph, and gave him an account of my
embassy. That prince said he had been uneasy as I was so long in
returning, but that he always hoped God would preserve me. When I told
him the adventure of the elephants, he seemed much surprised, and would
never have given any credit to it had he not known my veracity. He
deemed this story, and the other relations I had given him, to be so
curious, that he ordered one of his secretaries to write them in
characters of gold, and lay them up in his treasury. I retired well
satisfied with the honours I received, and the presents which he gave
me; and ever since I have devoted myself wholly to my family, kindred
and friends."

Sinbad here finished the relation of his seventh and last voyage, and
then, addressing himself to Hindbad, "Well, friend," said he, "did you
ever hear of any person that suffered so much as I have done, or of any
mortal that has gone through so many vicissitudes? Is it not reasonable
that, after all this, I should enjoy a quiet and pleasant life?" As he
said this, Hindbad drew near to him, and kissing his hand, said, "I must
acknowledge sir, that you have gone through many imminent dangers; my
troubles are not comparable to yours; if they afflict me for a time, I
comfort myself with the thoughts of the profit I get by them. You not
only deserve a quiet life, but are worthy of all the riches you enjoy,
because you make of them such a good and generous use. May you therefore
continue to live in happiness till the day of your death!" Sinbad then
gave him one hundred sequins more, received him into the number of his
friends and desired him to quit his porter's employment, and come and
dine every day with him, that he might have ample reason to remember
Sinbad the voyager and his adventures.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Arabian Nights, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ***

***** This file should be named 20916-8.txt or 20916-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/9/1/20916/

Produced by Irma pehar, Graeme Mackreth, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.