I remained, by day hiding myself in a tree, and at night walking about
the open part of the island. Thus I continued for the space of two
months; and I perceived that, on the western side of the island, the
water of the sea every day retired, until, after three months, the land
that had been beneath it became dry. Rejoicing at this, and feeling
confident now in my escape, I traversed this dry tract, and arrived at
an expanse of sand; whereupon I emboldened myself, and crossed it. I
then saw in the distance an appearance of fire, and, advancing toward
it, found it to be a palace, overlaid with plates of red copper, which,
reflecting the rays of the sun, seemed from a distance to be fire: and
when I drew near to it, reflecting upon this sight, there approached me
an old sheikh, accompanied by ten young men who were all blind of one
eye, at which I was extremely surprised. As soon as they saw me, they
saluted me, and asked me my story, which I related to them from first to
last; and they were filled with wonder. They then conducted me into the
palace, where I saw ten benches, upon each of which was a mattress
covered with a blue stuff; and each of the young men seated himself upon
one of these benches, while the sheikh took his place upon a smaller
one; after which they said to me: "Sit down, O young man, and ask no
question respecting our condition, nor respecting our being blind of one
eye." Then the sheikh arose, and brought to each of them some food, and
the same to me also; and next he brought to each of us some wine: and
after we had eaten, we sat drinking together until the time for sleep,
when the young men said to the sheikh: "Bring to us our accustomed
supply"--upon which the sheikh arose, and entered a closet, from which
he brought, upon his head, ten covered trays. Placing these upon the
floor, he lighted ten candles, and stuck one of them upon each tray;
and, having done this, he removed the covers, and there appeared beneath
them ashes mixed with pounded charcoal. The young men then tucked up
their sleeves above the elbow, and blackened their faces, and slapped
their cheeks, exclaiming: "We were reposing at our ease, and our
impertinent curiosity suffered us not to remain so!" Thus they did until
the morning, when the sheikh brought them some hot water, and they
washed their faces, and put on other clothes.

On witnessing this conduct, my reason was confounded, my heart was so
troubled that I forgot my own misfortunes, and I asked them the cause of
their strange behaviour; upon which they looked toward me, and said: "O
young man, ask not respecting that which doth not concern thee; but be
silent; for in silence is security from error." I remained with them a
whole month, during which, every night they did the same, and at length
I said to them: "I conjure you by Allah to remove this disquiet from my
mind, and to inform me of the cause of your acting in this manner, and
of your exclaiming; 'We were reposing at our ease, and our impertinent
curiosity suffered us not to remain so!' if ye inform me not, I will
leave you, and go my way." On hearing these words, they replied: "We
have not concealed this affair from thee but in our concern for thy
welfare, lest thou shouldst become like us, and the same affliction that
hath befallen us happen also to thee." I said, however: "Ye must
positively inform me of this matter." "We give thee good advice," said
they, "and do thou receive it, and ask us not respecting our case;
otherwise thou wilt become blind of one eye, like us"--but I still
persisted in my request; whereupon they said: "O young man, if this
befall thee, know that thou wilt be banished from our company." They
then all arose, and, taking a ram, slaughtered and skinned it, and said
to me: "Take this knife with thee, and introduce thyself into the skin
of the ram, and we will sew thee up in it, and go away; whereupon a bird
called the roc will come to thee, and, taking thee up by its talons,
will fly away with thee, and set thee down upon a mountain: then cut
open the skin with this knife, and get out, and the bird will fly away.
Thou must arise, as soon as it hath gone, and journey for half a day,
and thou wilt see before thee a lofty palace, encased with red gold, set
with various precious stones such as emeralds and rubies; and if thou
enter it thy case will be as ours; for our entrance into that palace was
the cause of our being blind of one eye; and if one of us would relate
to thee all that hath befallen him, his story would be too long for thee
to hear."

They then sewed me up in the skin, and entered their palace; and soon
after, there came an enormous white bird, which seized me, and flew away
with me, and set me down upon the mountain; whereupon I cut open the
skin, and got out; and the bird, as soon as it saw me, flew away. I rose
up quickly, and proceeded toward the palace, which I found to be as they
had described it to me; and when I had entered it, I beheld, at the
upper end of a saloon, forty young damsels, beautiful as so many moons,
and magnificently attired, who, as soon as they saw me, exclaimed:
"Welcome! Welcome! O our master and our lord! We have been for a month
expecting thee. Praise be to God who hath blessed us with one who is
worthy of us, and one of whom we are worthy!" After having thus greeted
me, they seated me upon a mattress, and said; "Thou art from this day
our master and prince, and we are thy handmaids, and entirely under thy
authority." They then brought to me some refreshments, and, when I had
eaten and drunk, they sat and conversed with me, full of joy and
happiness. So lovely were these ladies, that even a devotee, if he saw
them, would gladly consent to be their servant, and to comply with all
that they would desire. At the approach of night they all assembled
around me, and placed before me a table of fresh and dried fruits, with
other delicacies that the tongue cannot describe, and wine; and one
began to sing, while another played upon the lute. The wine-cups
circulated among us, and joy overcame me to such a degree as to
obliterate from my mind every earthly care, and make me exclaim: "This
is indeed a delightful life!" I passed a night of such enjoyment as I
had never before experienced; and on the morrow I entered the bath; and,
after I had washed myself, they brought me a suit of the richest
clothing, and we again sat down to a repast.

In this manner I lived with them a whole year; but on the first day of
the new year, they seated themselves around me, and began to weep, and
bade me farewell, clinging to my skirts. "What calamity hath befallen
you?" said I. "Ye are breaking my heart." They answered: "Would that we
had never known thee; for we have associated with many men, but have
seen none like thee. May God, therefore, not deprive us of thy company."
And they wept afresh. I said to them: "I wish that you would acquaint me
with the cause of this weeping." "Thou," they replied, "art the cause;
yet now, if thou wilt attend to what we tell thee, we shall never be
parted; but if thou act contrary to it, we are separated from this time;
and our hearts whisper to us that thou wilt not regard our warning."
"Inform me," said I, "and I will attend to your directions." And they
replied: "If then thou wouldst inquire respecting our history, know that
we are the daughters of kings: for many years it hath been our custom to
assemble here, and every year we absent ourselves during a period of
forty days; then returning, we indulge ourselves for a year in feasting
and drinking. This is our usual practice; and now we fear that thou wilt
disregard our directions when we are absent from thee. We deliver to
thee the keys of the palace, which are a hundred in number, belonging to
a hundred closets. Open each of these, and amuse thyself, and eat and
drink, and refresh thyself, excepting the closet that hath a door of red
gold; for if thou open this, the consequence will be a separation
between us and thee. We conjure thee, therefore, to observe our
direction, and to be patient during this period." Upon hearing this, I
swore to them that I would never open the closet to which they alluded;
and they departed, urging me to be faithful to my promise.

I remained alone in the palace, and at the approach of evening I opened
the first closet, and, entering it, found a mansion like paradise, with
a garden containing green trees loaded with ripe fruits, abounding with
singing birds, and watered by copious streams. My heart was soothed by
the sight, and I wandered among the trees, scenting the fragrance of the
flowers, and listening to the warbling of the birds as they sang the
praises of the One, the Almighty. After admiring the mingled colours of
the apple resembling the hue upon the cheek of the beloved maid and the
sallow countenance of the perplexed and timid lover, the sweet-smelling
quince diffusing an odour like musk and ambergris, and the plum shining
as the ruby, I retired from this place, and, having locked the door,
opened that of the next closet, within which I beheld a spacious tract
planted with numerous palm-trees, and watered by a river flowing among
rose-trees, and jasmine, and marjoram, and eglantine, and narcissus, and
gilliflower, the odours of which, diffused in every direction by the
wind, inspired me with the utmost delight. I locked again the door of
the second closet, and opened that of the third. Within this I found a
large saloon, paved with marbles of various colours, and with costly
minerals and precious gems, and containing cages constructed of sandal
and aloes-wood with singing birds within them, and others upon the
branches of trees which were planted there. My heart was charmed, my
trouble was dissipated, and I slept there until the morning. I then
opened the door of the fourth closet, and within this door I found a
great building in which were forty closets with open doors; and entering
these, I beheld pearls, and rubies, and chrysolites, and emeralds, and
other precious jewels such as the tongue cannot describe. I was
astonished at the sight, and said: "Such things as these, I imagine, are
not found in the treasury of any king. I am now the King of my age, and
all these treasures, through the goodness of God, are mine."

[Illustration]

_At the approach of evening I opened the first closet and, entering it,
found a mansion like paradise._

Thus I continued to amuse myself, passing from one place to another,
until thirty-nine days had elapsed, and I had opened the doors of all
the closets excepting that which they had forbidden me to open. My heart
was then disturbed by curiosity respecting this hundredth closet, and
the Devil, in order to plunge me into misery, induced me to open it. I
had not patience to abstain, though there remained of the appointed
period only one day: so I approached the closet, and opened the door;
and when I had entered, I perceived a fragrant odour, such as I had
never before smelt, which intoxicated me so that I fell down insensible,
and remained some time in this state: but at length recovering, I
fortified my heart, and proceeded. I found the floor overspread with
saffron, and the place illuminated by golden lamps and by candles, which
diffused the odours of musk and ambergris. I saw also a black horse, of
the hue of the darkest night, before which was a manger of white crystal
filled with cleansed sesame, and another, similar to it, containing
rose-water infused with musk: he was saddled and bridled, and his saddle
was of red gold. Wondering at the sight of him, I said within myself:
"This must be an animal of extraordinary qualities;" and, seduced by the
Devil, I led him out, and mounted him; but he moved not from his place.
I kicked him with my heel; but still he moved not: so I took a switch
and struck him with it; and as soon as he felt the blow he uttered a
sound like thunder, and, expanding a pair of wings, soared with me to an
immense height through the air, and then alighted upon the roof of
another palace, where he threw me from his back, and, by a violent blow
with his tail upon my face, struck out my eye, and left me.

Thus it was I became blind of one eye. I then recollected the
predictions of the ten young men. The horse again took wing, and soon
disappeared. I got up much vexed at the misfortune I had brought upon
myself. I walked upon the terrace, covering my eye with one of my hands,
for it pained me exceedingly, and then descended, and entered into a
hall. I soon discovered by the ten benches in a circle, and the eleventh
in the middle, smaller than the rest, that I was in the castle whence I
had been carried by the roc.

The ten young men were not in the hall when I entered; but came in soon
after, attended by the sheikh. They seemed not at all surprised to see
me, nor at the loss of my eye; but said: "We are sorry that we cannot
congratulate you on your return, as we could wish; but we are not the
cause of your misfortune." "I should do you wrong," I replied, "to lay
it to your charge; I have only myself to accuse." "If," said they, "it
be a subject of consolation to the afflicted to know that others share
their sufferings, you have in us this alleviation of your misfortune.
All that has happened to you we have also endured; we each of us tasted
the same pleasures during a year; and we had still continued to enjoy
them, had we not opened the golden door, when the princesses were
absent. You have been no wiser than we, and have incurred the same
punishment. We would gladly receive you into our company, to join with
us in the penance to which we are bound, and the duration of which we
know not. But we have already stated to you the reasons that render this
impossible: depart, therefore, and proceed to the court of Bagdad, where
you will meet with the person who is to decide your destiny." After they
had explained to me the road I was to travel, I departed from them, with
mournful heart and weeping eye, and, God having decreed me a safe
journey hither, I arrived at Bagdad, after I had shaved my beard, and
become a mendicant. Praise be to God, whose name be exalted, and whose
purposes concerning me are as yet hid in darkness.




THE STORY OF THE CITY OF BRASS


There was, in olden time, in Damascus of Syria, a king, named
Abd-El-Melik the son of Marwan; and he was sitting, one day, having with
him the great men of his empire, consisting of kings and sultans, when a
discussion took place among them, respecting the traditions of former
nations. They called to mind the stories of Solomon, son of David, and
the dominion which God had bestowed upon him over mankind, and the
genies, and the birds, and the wild beasts, and they said: "We have
heard from those who were before us, that God bestowed not upon any one
the power which He bestowed upon Solomon, so that he used to imprison
the genies and the devils in bottles of brass, and pour molten lead over
them, and seal a cover over them with his signet."

Then Talib, one of the sultans, related, that a man once embarked in a
ship with a company of others, and they voyaged to the island of Sicily
and ceased not in their course until there arose against them a wind
which bore them away to an unknown land. This happened during the black
darkness of night, and when the day shone forth, there came out to them,
from caves in that land, people of black complexion and with naked
bodies, like wild beasts, not understanding speech. They had a king of
their own race, and none of them knew Arabic save their king. So when
they saw the ship and those who were in her, he came forth to them
attended by a party of his companions, and saluted them and welcomed
them: They acquainted him with their state; and he said to them, "No
harm shall befall you; there hath not come to us any one of the sons of
Adam before you." And he entertained them with a banquet of the flesh of
birds and of wild beasts and of fish. And after this, the people of the
ship went down to divert themselves in the city, and they found one of
the fishermen who had cast his net in the sea to catch fish, and he drew
it up, and, lo, in it was a bottle of brass stopped with lead, which was
sealed with the signet of Solomon the son of David. And the fisherman
came forth and broke it; whereupon there proceeded from it a blue smoke,
which united with the clouds of heaven; and they heard a horrible voice,
saying: "Repentance! repentance! O Prophet of God!" Then, of that smoke
there was formed a person of terrible aspect, of terrific make, whose
head would reach as high as a mountain; and he disappeared from before
their eyes. As to the people of the ship, their hearts were almost
eradicated; but the blacks thought nothing of the event. And a man
returned to the king, and asked him respecting this; and the king
answered him: "Know that this is one of the genies whom Solomon, the son
of David, when he was incensed against them, imprisoned in these
bottles, and he poured lead over them, and threw them into the sea. When
the fisherman casteth his net, it generally bringeth up these bottles;
and when they are broken, there cometh forth from them a genie, who
imagineth that Solomon is still living; wherefore he repenteth, and
saith: 'Repentance! O Prophet of God!'"

And the Prince of the Faithful, Abd-El-Melik, wondered at these words,
and said: "By Allah, I desire to see some of these bottles!" So Talib
replied: "O Prince of the Faithful, thou art able to do so, and yet
remain in thy country. Send to thy brother Abd-El-Azeez, that he may
write orders to the Emeer Moosa to journey from the Western Country to
this mountain which we have mentioned, and to bring thee what thou
desirest of these bottles; for the furthest tract of his province is
adjacent to this mountain." And the Prince of the Faithful approved of
his advice, and said: "O Talib, thou hast spoken truth and I desire that
thou be my messenger to Moosa for this purpose." To this, Talib replied:
"Most willingly, O Prince of the Faithful." And the king said to him:
"Go in dependence on the blessing of God, and his aid." Then he gave
orders that they should write for him a letter to his brother
Abd-El-Azeez, his viceroy in Egypt, and another letter to Moosa, his
viceroy in the Western Country, commanding him to journey, himself, in
search of the bottles of Solomon. He sealed the two letters, and
delivered them to Talib, commanding him to hasten, and he gave him
riches and riders and footmen to aid him in his way.

So Talib went forth on his way to Egypt, and when the Emeer Moosa knew
of his approach, he went forth to him and met him, and rejoiced at his
arrival; and Talib handed to him the letter. So he took it and read it,
and understood its meaning; and he put it upon his head, saying: "I hear
and obey the command of the Prince of the Faithful." He determined to
summon his great men; and they presented themselves; and he inquired of
them respecting that which had been made known to him by the letter;
whereupon they said: "O Emeer, if thou desire him who will guide thee to
that place, have recourse to the Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad; for he is a
knowing man, and hath travelled much, and he is acquainted with the
deserts and wastes and the seas, and their inhabitants and their
wonders, and the countries and their districts. Have recourse therefore
to him, and he will direct thee to the object of thy desire."
Accordingly he gave orders to bring him, and he came before him; and,
lo, he was a very old man, whom the vicissitudes of years and times had
rendered decrepit. The Emeer Moosa saluted him, and said to him: "O
Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad, our lord, the Prince of the Faithful, hath
commanded us thus and thus, and I possess little knowledge of that land,
and it hath been told me that thou art acquainted with that country and
the routes. Hast thou then a wish to accomplish the affair of the Prince
of the Faithful?" The sheikh replied: "Know, O Emeer, that this route is
difficult, far extending, with few tracks." The emeer said to him: "How
long a period doth it require?" He answered: "It is a journey of two
years and some months going, and the like returning; and on the way are
difficulties and horrors, and extraordinary and wonderful things. But,"
he said, "God will assuredly make this affair easy to us through the
blessing attendant upon thee, O Viceroy of the Prince of the Faithful."

After this they departed, and they continued their journey until they
arrived at a palace; whereupon the sheikh said: "Advance with us to this
palace, which presenteth a lesson to him who will be admonished." So the
Emeer Moosa advanced thither, together with the Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad and
his chief companions, till they came to its entrance. And they found it
open, and having lofty angles, and steps, among which were two wide
steps of coloured marbles, the like of which hath not been seen: the
ceilings and walls were decorated with gold and silver and minerals, and
over the entrance was a slab, whereon was an inscription in ancient
Greek; and the Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad said: "Shall I read it, O Emeer?" The
emeer answered; "Advance and read." So he read it; and, lo, it was
poetry; and it was this:

  Here was a people whom, after their works, thou shalt see wept over for
    their lost dominion;
  And in this palace is the last information respecting lords collected in
    the dust.

  Death hath destroyed them and disunited them, and in the dust they have
    lost what they amassed;
  As though they had only put down their loads to rest a while: quickly
    have they departed!

And the Emeer Moosa wept and said: "There is no deity but God, the
Living, the Enduring without failure!"

Then they attentively viewed the palace; and, lo, it was devoid of
inhabitants, destitute of household and occupants: its courts were
desolate, and its apartments were deserted; and in the midst of it was a
chamber covered with a lofty dome, rising high into the air, around
which were four hundred tombs.

And the Emeer Moosa drew near to the dome-crowned chamber, and, lo, it
had eight doors of sandalwood, with nails of gold, ornamented with stars
of silver set with various jewels, and he beheld in it a long tomb, of
terrible appearance, whereon was a tablet of iron of China; and the
Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad drew near to it, and read its inscription; and, lo,
on it was written:

  Shouldst thou think upon me after the length of my age, and the
    vicissitudes of days and circumstances,
  I am the son of Sheddad, who held dominion over mankind and each tract of
    the whole earth.
  All the stubborn troops became abject unto me, and Esh-Sham from Misr
    unto Adnan.
  In glory I reigned, abasing their kings, the people of the earth fearing
    my dominion;
  And I beheld the tribes and armies in my power, and saw the countries and
    their inhabitants dread me.
  When I mounted, I beheld my army comprising a million bridles upon
     neighing steeds;
  And I possessed wealth that could not be calculated, which I treasured up
    against misfortunes,
  Determining to devote the whole of my property for the purpose of
    extending the term of my life.

  But the Deity would nought save the execution of his purpose; and thus I
    became separated from my brethren.
  Death, the disuniter of mankind, came to me, and I was removed from
    grandeur to the mansion of contempt;
  And I found the recompense of all my past actions, for which I am
    pledged: for I was sinful!
  Then raise thyself, lest thou be upon a brink; and beware of calamities!
    Mayest thou be led aright!

And again the Emeer Moosa wept, in considering the fates of the people;
after which, as they were going about through the different apartments
of the palace, and viewing attentively its chambers and its places of
diversion, they came to a table upon four legs of alabaster, whereon was
inscribed:

  Upon this table have eaten a thousand one-eyed kings, and a thousand
  kings each sound in both eyes. All of them have quitted the world, and
  taken up their abode in the burial-grounds and the graves.

And the Emeer Moosa wrote down all this. Then he went forth, and took
not with him from the palace aught save the table.

The soldiers proceeded, with the Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad before them shewing
them the way, until all the first day had passed, and the second, and
the third. They then came to a high hill, at which they looked, and, lo,
upon it was a horseman of brass, on the top of whose spear was a wide
and glistening head that almost deprived the beholder of sight, and on
it was inscribed:

  O thou who comest unto me, if thou know not the way that leadeth to
  the City of Brass, rub the hand of the horseman, and he will turn, and
  then will stop, and in whatsoever direction he stoppeth, thither
  proceed, without fear and without difficulty; for it will lead thee to
  the City of Brass.

And when the Emeer Moosa had rubbed the hand of the horseman, it turned
like the blinding lightning, and faced a different direction from that
in which they were travelling.

The party therefore turned thither and journeyed on, and it was the
right way. They took that route, and continued their course the same day
and the next night until they had traversed a wide tract of country. And
as they were proceeding, one day, they came to a pillar of black stone,
wherein was a person sunk to his arm-pits, and he had two huge wings,
and four arms; two of them like those of the sons of Adam, and two like
the fore-legs of lions, with claws. He had hair upon his head like the
tails of horses, and two eyes like two burning coals, and he had a third
eye, in his forehead, like the eye of the lynx, from which there
appeared sparks of fire. He was black and tall; and he was crying out:
"Extolled be the perfection of my Lord, who hath appointed me this
severe affliction and painful torture until the day of resurrection!"
When the party beheld him, their reason fled from them, and they were
stupefied at the sight of his form, and retreated in flight; and the
Emeer Moosa said to the Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad: "What is this?" He
answered: "I know not what he is." And the emeer said: "Draw near to
him, and investigate his case: perhaps he will discover it, and perhaps
thou wilt learn his history." So the Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad drew near to
him, and said to him: "O thou person, what is thy name, and what is thy
nature, and what hath placed thee here in this manner?" And the person
answered him: "As to me, I am an efreet of the genies, and my name is
Dahish, and I am restrained here by the majesty of God." Then the Emeer
Moosa said: "O Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad, ask him what is the cause of his
confinement in this pillar." He therefore asked respecting that, and the
efreet answered him: "Verily my story is wonderful; and it is this:

"There belonged to one of the sons of Iblees an idol of red carnelian,
of which I was made guardian; and there used to worship it one of the
Kings of the Sea, of great glory, leading, among his troops of the
genies, a million warriors who smote with swords before him, and who
answered his prayer in cases of difficulty. These genies who obeyed him
were under my command and authority, following my words when I ordered
them: all of them were in rebellion against Solomon, the son of David;
and I used to enter the body of the idol, and command them and forbid
them. Now the daughter of that king was a frequent adorer of the idol,
assiduous in the worship of it, and she was the handsomest of the people
of her age, endowed with beauty and loveliness, and elegance and
perfection; and I described her to Solomon, on whom be peace! So he sent
to her father, saying to him: 'Marry to me thy daughter, and break thy
carnelian-idol, and bear witness that there is no deity but God, and
that Solomon is the Prophet of God. But if thou refuse, I will come to
thee with forces that shall leave thee like yesterday that hath passed.'
And when the messenger of Solomon came to him, the King of the Sea was
insolent, and magnified himself and was proud. Then he said to his
viziers: 'What say ye respecting the affair of Solomon? For he hath sent
demanding my daughter, and commanding me to break my carnelian-idol, and
to adopt his faith.' And they replied: 'O great King, can Solomon do
aught unto thee, when thou art in the midst of this vast sea? He cannot
prevail against thee; since the genies will fight on thy side; and thou
shalt seek aid against him of thine idol that thou worshippest. The
right opinion is, that thou consult thy red carnelian-idol, and hear
what will be his reply: if he counsel thee to fight him, fight him; but
otherwise, do not.' And upon this the king went immediately, and, going
in to his idol, after he had offered a sacrifice and slain victims, fell
down before it prostrate, and began to weep, and to seek counsel.

"Thereupon I entered the body of the idol, by reason of my ignorance,
and my solicitude respecting the affair of Solomon, and recited this
couplet:

  'As for me, I am not in fear of him; for I am acquainted with everything.
  If he wish to wage war with me, I will go forth, and I will snatch his
    soul from him.'

So when the king heard my reply to him, his heart was strengthened, and
he determined to wage war with Solomon the Prophet of God and to fight
against him. Accordingly, when the messenger of Solomon came, he
inflicted upon him a painful beating, and returned him a shameful reply;
and he sent to threaten Solomon, saying to him, by the messenger: 'Dost
thou threaten me with false words? Either come thou to me, or I will go
to thee.'

"Then the messenger returned to Solomon, and acquainted him with all
that had occurred. And when the Prophet of God heard that, his
resolution was roused, and he prepared his forces, consisting of genies
and men, and wild beasts, and birds and reptiles. He commanded his
vizier, Ed-Dimiryat, the king of the genies, to collect them from every
place: so he collected for him, of the devils, six hundred millions. He
also commanded Asaf, his vizier of men, to collect his soldiers of
mankind; and their number was one million, or more. He made ready the
accoutrements and weapons, and mounted, with his forces, upon the magic
carpet, with the birds flying over his head, and the wild beasts beneath
the carpet marching, until he alighted upon his enemy's coast, and
surrounded his island, having filled the land with the forces. He then
sent to our king, saying to him: 'Behold, I have arrived: therefore
submit thyself to my authority, and acknowledge my mission, and break
thine idol, and worship the One, the Adored God, and marry to me thy
daughter according to law, and say thou, and those who are with thee, I
testify that there is no deity but God, and I testify that Solomon is
the Prophet of God. If thou say that, peace and safety shall be thy lot.
But if thou refuse, thy defending thyself from me in this island shall
not prevent thee: for God hath commanded the wind to obey me, and I will
order it to convey me unto thee on the carpet, and will make thee an
example to restrain others.' So the messenger came to him, and
communicated to him the message of the Prophet! But the king said to
him: 'There is no way for the accomplishment of this thing that he
requireth: therefore inform him that I am coming forth unto him.'
Accordingly the messenger returned to Solomon, and gave him the reply.
The king then sent to the people of his country, and collected for
himself, of the genies that were under his authority, a million; and to
these he added others, of the devils that were in the islands and on the
mountains; after which he made ready his forces, and opened the
armouries, and distributed to them the weapons. And as to the Prophet of
God, he disposed his troops, commanding the wild beasts to form
themselves into two divisions, on the right of the people and on their
left, and commanding the birds to be upon the islands. He ordered them
also when the assault should be made, to tear out the eyes of their
antagonists with their beaks, and to beat their faces with their wings;
and he ordered the wild beasts to tear in pieces their horses; and they
replied: 'We hear and obey God and thee, O Prophet of God!' Then Solomon
set for himself a couch of alabaster adorned with jewels, and plated
with plates of red gold, and he placed his vizier Asaf on the right
side, and his vizier, Ed-Dimiryat, on the left side, and the kings of
mankind on his right, and the kings of the genies on his left, and the
wild beasts and the vipers and serpents before him.

"After this, they came upon us all together, and we contended with him
in a wide tract for a period of two days; and calamity befell us on the
third day, and the decree of God was executed among us. The first who
charged upon Solomon were I and my troops; and I said to my companions:
'Keep in your places in the battle-field while I go forth to them and
challenge Ed-Dimiryat.' And, lo, he came forth, like a great mountain,
his fires flaming, and his smoke ascending; and he approached, and
smote me with a flaming fire; and his arrow prevailed over my fire. He
cried out at me with a prodigious cry, so that I imagined the heaven had
fallen, and the mountains shook at his voice. Then he commanded his
companions, and they charged upon us all together: we also charged upon
them: the fires rose and the smoke ascended, the hearts of the
combatants were almost cleft asunder, and the battle raged. The birds
fought in the air; and the wild beasts in the dust; and I contended with
Ed-Dimiryat until he wearied me and I wearied him; after which my
companions and troops were enervated, and my tribes were routed. I flew
from before Ed-Dimiryat; but he followed me a journey of three months,
until he overtook me. I had fallen down through fatigue, and he rushed
upon me, and made me a prisoner. So I said to him: 'By Him who hath
exalted thee and abased me, pity me, and take me before Solomon.' But
when I came before Solomon, he met me in a most evil manner: he caused
this pillar to be brought, and hollowed it, and put me in it, and sealed
me with his signet; after which, he chained me, and Ed-Dimiryat conveyed
me to this place, where he set me down as thou seest me; and this pillar
is my prison until the day of resurrection."

The party therefore wondered at him, and at the horrible nature of his
form; and the Emeer Moosa said: "There is no deity but God!" And the
Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad said to the efreet: "O thou, I ask thee concerning a
thing of which do thou inform us." The efreet replied: "Ask concerning
what thou wilt." And the sheikh said: "Are there in this place any of
the efreets confined in bottles of brass from the time of Solomon?" He
answered: "Yes, in the Sea of El-Karkar, where are a people of the
descendants of Noah, whose country the deluge reached not, and they are
separated there from the rest of the sons of Adam." "And where," said
the sheikh, "is the way to the City of Brass, and the place wherein are
the bottles? What distance is there between us and it?" The efreet
answered: "It is near." So the party left him, and proceeded; and there
appeared to them in the distance a great black object, with two fires
corresponding with each other in position; whereupon the Emeer Moosa
said to the sheikh: "What is this great black object, and these two
corresponding fires?" The guide answered him: "Be rejoiced, O Emeer; for
this is the City of Brass, and this is the appearance of it that I find
described in the Book of Hidden Treasures; that its wall is of black
stones, and it hath two towers of brass, which the beholder seeth
resembling two corresponding fires; and thence it is named the City of
Brass." They ceased not to proceed until they arrived at it; and, lo, it
was lofty, strongly fortified, rising high into the air, impenetrable:
the height of its walls was eighty cubits, and it had five and twenty
gates, none of which would open but by means of some artifice. They
stopped before it, and endeavoured to discover one of its gates; but
they could not; and the Emeer Moosa said to the Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad: "O
sheikh, I see not to this city any gate." The sheikh replied: "O Emeer,
thus do I find it described in the Book of Hidden Treasures; that it
hath five and twenty gates, and that none of its gates may be opened but
from within the city." "And how," said the emeer, "can we contrive to
enter it, and divert ourselves with a view of its wonders?"

Then the Emeer Moosa ordered one of his young men to mount a camel, and
ride round the city, in the hope that he might discover a trace of a
gate. So one of his young men mounted, and proceeded around it for two
days with their nights, prosecuting his journey with diligence, and not
resting; and when the third day arrived, he came in sight of his
companions, and he was astounded at that which he beheld of the extent
of the city, and its height. Then he said: "O Emeer, the easiest place
in it is this place at which ye have alighted." And thereupon the Emeer
Moosa took Talib and the Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad, and they ascended a
mountain opposite the city, and overlooking it; and when they had
ascended that mountain, they saw a city than which eyes had not beheld
any greater. Its pavilions were lofty, and its domes were shining; its
rivers were running, its trees were fruitful, and its gardens bore ripe
produce. It was a city with impenetrable gates, empty, still, without a
voice but the owl hooting in its quarters, and the raven croaking in its
thoroughfare-streets, and bewailing those who had been in it.

And the Emeer Moosa fainted with sorrow; his tears ran down upon his
cheeks, and he said: "By Allah, indifference to the world is the most
appropriate and the most sure course!"

And when they came back to the troops, they passed the day devising
means of entering the city; and the Emeer Moosa said to those of his
chief officers who were around him: "How shall we contrive to enter the
city, that we may see its wonders? Perhaps we shall find in it something
by which we may ingratiate ourselves with the Prince of the Faithful."
Talib replied: "Let us make a ladder, and mount upon it, and perhaps we
shall gain access to the gate from within." And the emeer said: "This is
what occurred to my mind, and excellent is the advice." Then he called
to the carpenters and blacksmiths, and ordered them to make straight
some pieces of wood, and to construct a ladder covered with plates of
iron. And they did so, and made it strong. They employed themselves in
constructing it a whole month, and many men were occupied in making it.
And they set it up and fixed it against the wall, and it proved to be
equal to the wall in height, as though it had been made for it before
that day. So the Emeer Moosa wondered at it, and said: "God bless you!
It seemeth, from the excellence of your work, as though ye had adapted
it by measurement to the wall." He then said to the people: "Which of
you will ascend this ladder, and mount upon the wall, and walk along it,
and contrive means of descending into the city, that he may see how the
case is, and then inform us of the mode of opening the gate?" And one of
them answered: "I will ascend it, O Emeer, and descend and open the
gate." The emeer therefore replied: "Mount. God bless thee!"
Accordingly, the man ascended the ladder until he reached the top of it;
when he stood, and fixed his eyes toward the city, clapped his hands,
and cried out with his loudest voice, saying: "Thou art beautiful!" Then
he cast himself down into the city, and was destroyed. So the Emeer
Moosa said: "If we do thus with all our companions, there will not
remain of them one; and we shall be unable to accomplish our affair, and
the affair of the Prince of the Faithful. Depart ye; for we have no
concern with this city." But one of them said: "Perhaps another than
this may be more steady than he." And a second ascended, and a third,
and a fourth, and a fifth; and they ceased not to ascend by that ladder
to the top of the wall, one after another, until twelve men of them had
gone, acting as acted the first. Therefore the Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad said:
"There is none for this affair but myself, and the experienced is not
like the inexperienced." But the Emeer Moosa said to him: "Thou shalt
not do that, nor will I allow thee to ascend to the top of this wall;
for shouldst thou die, thou wouldst be the cause of the death of us all,
and there would not remain of us one; since thou art the guide of the
party." The sheikh, however, replied: "Perhaps the object will be
accomplished by my means, through the will of God, whose name be
exalted!" And thereupon all the people agreed to his ascending.

[Illustration]

_And when they had ascended that mountain they saw a city than which
eyes had not beheld any greater._

Then Abd-Es-Samad arose, and, having said: "In the name of God, the
Compassionate, the Merciful!"--he ascended the ladder, repeating the
praises of God, and reciting the Verses of Safety, until he reached the
top of the wall; when he clapped his hands, and fixed his eyes. The
people therefore all called out to him, and said: "O Sheikh
Abd-Es-Samad, do not cast thyself down! If Abd-Es-Samad fall, we all
perish!" Then Abd-Es-Samad sat a long time repeating the praises of God,
and reciting the Verses of Safety; after which he rose with energy, and
called out with his loudest voice: "O Emeer, no harm shall befall you;
for God hath averted from me the effect of the artifice of the Devil."
So the emeer said to him: "What hast thou seen, O Sheikh?" He answered:
"When I reached the top of the wall I beheld ten damsels, like moons,
who made a sign with their hands, as though they would say: 'Come to
us!' And it seemed to me that beneath me was a sea of water; whereupon I
desired to cast myself down, as our companions did: but I beheld them
dead; so I withheld myself from them, and recited some words of the book
of God, whereupon He averted from me the influence of those damsels, and
they departed; therefore I cast not myself down. There is no doubt that
this is an enchantment which the people of this city contrived in order
to repel from it every one who should wish to obtain access to it."

He then walked along the wall till he came to the two towers of brass,
when he saw that they had gates of gold, without any sign of the means
of opening them. Therefore the sheikh, looking attentively, saw in the
middle of one of the gates a figure of a horseman of brass, having one
hand extended, as though he were pointing with it, and on it was an
inscription, which the sheikh read, and, lo, it contained these words:

  Turn the pin that is in the middle of the front of the horseman's body
  twelve times, and then the gate will open.

So he turned the pin twelve times; whereupon the gate opened
immediately, with a noise like thunder; and the sheikh entered. He was a
learned man, acquainted with all languages and characters. And he walked
on until he entered a long passage, whence he descended some steps, and
he found a place with handsome wooden benches, on which were people
dead, and over their heads were elegant shields, and keen swords, and
strung bows, and notched arrows. And behind the next gate were a bar of
iron, and barricades of wood, and locks of delicate fabric, and strong
apparatus. Upon this, the sheikh said within himself: "Perhaps the keys
are with these people." Then he looked, and, lo, there was a sheikh who
appeared to be the oldest of them, and he was upon a high wooden bench
among the dead men. So Abd-Es-Samad said: "May not the keys of the city
be with this sheikh! Perhaps he was the gate-keeper of the city, and
these were under his authority." He therefore drew near to him, and
lifted up his garments, and, lo, the keys were hung to his waist. At the
sight of them, Abd-Es-Samad rejoiced exceedingly; and he took the keys,
opened the locks, and pulled the gate and the barricades and other
apparatus, which opened and the gate also opened, with a noise like
thunder. Upon this the sheikh exclaimed: "God is most great!" and the
people made the same exclamation with him, rejoicing at the event. The
Emeer Moosa also rejoiced at the safety of Abd-Es-Samad, and at the
opening of the gate of the city; the people thanked him for that which
he had done, and all the troops hastened to enter the gate. But the
Emeer Moosa cried out to them, saying to them: "O people, if all of us
enter, we shall not be secure from accident. Half shall enter, and half
shall remain behind."

The Emeer Moosa then entered the gate, and with him half of the people,
who bore their weapons of war. And the party saw their companions lying
dead: so they buried them. They saw also the gate-keepers and servants
and chamberlains and lieutenants lying upon beds of silk, all of them
dead. And they entered the market of the city, and beheld that the shops
were open, and the scales hung up, and the utensils of brass ranged in
order, and the stores were full of all kinds of goods. And they saw the
merchants dead in their shops: their skins were dried, and they had
become examples to him who would be admonished. And they left this
place, and passed on to the silk-market, in which were silks and
brocades interwoven with red gold and white silver upon various colours,
and the owners were dead, lying upon skins, and appearing almost as
though they would speak. Leaving these, they went on to the market of
jewels and pearls and jacinths; and they left it, and passed on to the
market of the money-changers, whom they found dead, with varieties of
silks beneath them, and their shops were filled with gold and silver.
These they left, and they proceeded to the markets of the perfumers;
and, lo, their shops were filled with varieties of perfumes, and bags of
musk, and ambergris, and aloes-wood, and camphor; and the owners were
all dead, not having with them any food. And when they went forth from
the market of the perfumers, they found near unto it a palace,
decorated, and strongly constructed; and they entered it, and found
banners unfurled, and drawn swords, and strung bows and shields hung up
by chains of gold and silver, and helmets gilded with red gold. And in
the passages of that palace were benches of ivory, ornamented with
plates of brilliant gold, and with silk, on which were men whose skins
had dried upon the bones; the ignorant would imagine them to be
sleeping; but, from the want of food, they had died, and tasted
mortality.

And the Emeer Moosa went on into the interior of the palace. There he
beheld a great hall, and four large and lofty chambers, each one
fronting another, wide, decorated with gold and silver and with various
colours. In the midst of the hall was a great fountain of alabaster,
over which was a canopy of brocade; and in those chambers were fountains
lined with marble; and channels of water flowed along the floors of
those chambers, the four streams meeting in a great tank lined with
marbles of various colours. The Emeer Moosa then said to the Sheikh
Abd-Es-Samad: "Enter these chambers with us." So they entered the first
chamber; and they found it filled with gold and with white silver, and
pearls and jewels, and jacinths and precious minerals. They found in it
also chests full of red and yellow and white brocades. And they went
thence to the second chamber, and opened a closet in it, and, lo, it was
filled with arms and weapons of war, consisting of gilded helmets, and
coats of mail, and swords, and lances, and maces, and other instruments
of war and battle. Then they passed thence to the third chamber, in
which they found closets having upon their doors closed locks, and over
them were curtains worked with various kinds of embroidery. They opened
one of these closets, and found it filled with weapons decorated with
varieties of gold and silver and jewels. And they went thence to the
fourth chamber, where also they found closets, one of which they opened,
and they found it full of utensils for food and drink, consisting of
various vessels of gold and silver, and saucers of crystal, and cups set
with brilliant pearls and cups of carnelian, and other things. So they
began to take what suited them of those things, and each of the soldiers
carried off what he could. And when they determined to go forth from
those chambers, they saw there a door inlaid with ivory and ebony, and
adorned with plates of brilliant gold. Over it was hung a curtain of
silk worked with various kinds of embroidery, and upon it were locks of
white silver, to be opened by artifice, without a key. The Sheikh
Abd-Es-Samad therefore advanced to those locks, and he opened them by
his knowledge and excellent skill. And the party entered a passage paved
with marble, upon the sides of which were curtains whereon were figured
various wild beasts and birds, all these being worked with red gold and
white silver, and their eyes were of pearls and jacinths: whosoever
beheld them was confounded.

They then passed on, and found a saloon constructed of polished marble
adorned with jewels. The beholder imagined that upon its floor was
running water, and if any one walked upon it he would slip. The Emeer
Moosa therefore ordered the Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad to throw upon it
something that they might be enabled to walk on it; and he did this, and
contrived so that they passed on. And they found in it a great dome
constructed of stones gilded with red gold. The party had not beheld, in
all that they had seen, anything more beautiful than it. And in the
midst of that dome was a great dome-crowned structure of alabaster,
around which were lattice windows, decorated, and adorned with oblong
emeralds, such as none of the kings could procure. In it was a pavilion
of brocade, raised upon columns of red gold, and within this were birds,
the feet of which were of emeralds; beneath each bird was a net of
brilliant pearls, spread over a fountain; and by the brink of the
fountain was placed a couch adorned with pearls and jewels and jacinths,
whereon was a damsel resembling the shining sun. Eyes had not beheld
one more beautiful. Upon her was a garment of brilliant pearls, on her
head was a crown of red gold, with a fillet of jewels, on her neck was a
necklace of jewels in the middle of which were refulgent gems, and upon
her forehead were two jewels the light of which was like that of the
sun; and she seemed as though she were looking at the people, and
observing them to the right and left. When the Emeer Moosa beheld this
damsel, he wondered extremely at her loveliness, and was confounded by
her beauty and the redness of her cheeks and the blackness of her hair.
Any beholder would imagine that she was alive, and not dead. And they
said to her: "Peace be on thee, O damsel!" But Talib said to the emeer:
"May God amend thy state! Know that this damsel is dead. There is no
life in her. How then can she return the salutation?" And he added: "O
Emeer, she is skilfully embalmed; and her eyes have been taken out after
her death, and quicksilver hath been put beneath them, after which they
have been restored to their places; so they gleam; and whenever the air
putteth them in motion, the beholder imagineth that she twinkleth her
eyes, though she is dead."

And as to the couch upon which was the damsel, it had steps, and upon
the steps were two slaves, one of them white and the other black; and in
the hand of one of them was a weapon of steel, and in the hand of the
other a jewelled sword that blinded the eyes; and before the two slaves
was a tablet of gold, whereon was read an inscription, which was this:

  In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. Praise be to God,
  the Creator of Man; and He is the Lord of lords, and the Cause of
  causes. O thou, if thou know me not, I will acquaint thee with my name
  and my descent. I am Tedmur, the daughter of the King of the
  Amalekites. I possessed what none of the kings possessed, and ruled
  with justice, and acted impartially toward my subjects: I gave and
  bestowed, and I lived a long time in the enjoyment of happiness and an
  easy life, and possessing emancipated female and male slaves. Thus I
  did until the summoner of death came to my abode, and disasters
  occurred before me. And the case was this: Seven years in succession
  came upon us, during which no water descended on us from heaven, nor
  did any grass grow for us on the face of the earth. So we ate what
  food we had in our dwellings, and after that, we fell upon the beasts
  and ate them, and there remained nothing. Upon this, therefore, I
  caused the wealth to be brought, and meted it with a measure, and sent
  it by trusty men, who went about with it through all the districts,
  not leaving unvisited a single large city, to seek for some food. But
  they found it not; and they returned to us with the wealth, after a
  long absence. So thereupon we exposed to view our riches and our
  treasures, locked the gates of the fortresses in our city, and
  submitted ourselves to the decree of our Lord, committing our case to
  our Master; and thus we all died, as thou beholdest, and left what we
  had built and what we had treasured. This is our story: Whoso arriveth
  at our city, and entereth it, let him take of the wealth what he can,
  but not touch anything that is on my body; for it is the covering of
  my person. Therefore let him fear God, and not seize aught of it; for
  he would destroy himself. Peace be on you! I beg God, moreover, to
  save you from the evil of trials and sickness.

The Emeer Moosa, when he heard these words, again wept and was
admonished by what he witnessed. He then said to his companions: "Bring
the sacks, and fill them with part of these riches and these vessels and
rarities and jewels." And thereupon, Talib, the son of Sahl, said to the
Emeer Moosa: "O Emeer, shall we leave this damsel with the things that
are upon her? They are things that have no equal, nor is the like of
them at any time found, and they are more than the riches thou hast
taken, and will be the best present by which thou mayest ingratiate
thyself with the Prince of the Faithful." But the emeer replied:
"Heardest thou not that which the damsel hath given as a charge, in the
inscription upon this tablet? Moreover, and especially, she hath given
it as a charge offered in confidence, and we are not of the people of
treachery." The Vizier Talib, however, said: "And on account of these
words wilt thou leave these riches and these jewels, when she is dead?
What then should she do with these things, which are the ornaments of
the world, and the decoration of the living? With a garment of cotton
might this damsel be covered, and we are more worthy of the things than
she." Then he drew near to the steps, and ascended them until he reached
the spot between the two slaves, when, lo, one of these two smote him
upon his back, and the other smote him with the sword that was in his
hand, and struck off his head, and he fell down dead. So the Emeer Moosa
said: "May God not regard with mercy thy resting-place! There was, in
these riches, a sufficiency; and covetousness doth dishonour the person
in whom it existeth!" He thereupon gave orders for the entry of the
troops, who accordingly entered, and they loaded the camels with part of
those riches and minerals; after which the Emeer Moosa commanded them to
close the gate as it was before.

They then proceeded along the sea-coast until they came in sight of a
high mountain overlooking the sea. In it were many caves, and, lo, in
these was a people of the blacks, clad in hides, and with burnouses of
hides upon their heads, whose language was not known. And when they saw
the troops, they ran away from them, and fled, while their women and
their children stood at the entrances of the caves. So the Emeer Moosa
said: "O Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad, what are these people?" And he answered:
"These are the objects of the inquiry of the Prince of the Faithful."
They therefore alighted, and the tents were pitched, and the riches were
put down; and they had not rested when the king of the blacks came down
from the mountain, and drew near to the troops. He was acquainted with
the Arabic language; wherefore, when he came to the Emeer Moosa, he
saluted him; and the emeer returned his salutation, and treated him with
honour. Then the king of the blacks said to the emeer: "Are ye of
mankind, or of the genies?" The emeer answered: "As to us, we are of
mankind; and as to you, there is no doubt but that ye are of the
genies, because of your seclusion in this mountain that is separated
from the world, and because of the greatness of your make." But the king
of the blacks replied: "Nay, we are a people of the race of Adam, of the
sons of Ham, the son of Noah, on whom be peace! And as to this sea, it
is known by the name of El-Karkar."

The Emeer Moosa then said to him: "We are the associates of the King of
El-Islam, Abd-El-Melik the son of Marwan; and we have come on account of
the bottles of brass that are here in your sea, and wherein are the
devils imprisoned from the time of Solomon, the son of David. He hath
commanded us to bring him some of them, that he may see them, and divert
himself by the view of them." And the king of the blacks replied: "Most
willingly." Then he feasted him with fish, and ordered the divers to
bring up from the sea some of the bottles of Solomon; and they brought
up for them twelve bottles; wherewith the Emeer Moosa was delighted, and
the Sheikh Abd-Es-Samad also, and the soldiers, on account of the
accomplishment of the affair of the Prince of the Faithful. The Emeer
Moosa thereupon presented to the king of the blacks many presents, and
gave him large gifts. In like manner, too, the king of the blacks gave
to the Emeer Moosa a present consisting of wonders of the sea.

Then they bade him farewell, and they journeyed back until they came to
the land of Syria, and went in to the Prince of the Faithful; whereupon
the Emeer Moosa acquainted him with all that he had seen, and all that
had occurred to him with respect to the verses and histories and
admonitions, and told him of the case of Talib the son of Sahl. And the
Prince of the Faithful said to him: "Would that I had been with you,
that I might have beheld what ye beheld!" He then took the bottles, and
proceeded to open one after another, and the devils came forth from
them, saying: "Repentance, O Prophet of God! We will not return to the
like conduct ever!" And Abd-El-Melik the son of Marwan wondered at this.
After this, the Prince of the Faithful caused the riches to be brought
before him, and divided them among the people. And he said: "God hath
not bestowed upon any one the like of what He bestowed upon Solomon the
son of David."

This is the end of that which hath come down to us, of the history of
the City of Brass, entire. And God is all-knowing.




THE STORY OF ALI BABA AND THE FORTY THIEVES


In a town in Persia, there lived two brothers, one named Cassim, the
other Ali Baba. Their father left them scarcely anything; but as he had
divided his little property equally between them, it would seem that
their fortune ought to have been equal; but chance determined otherwise.

Cassim married a wife, who soon after became heiress to a large sum, and
to a warehouse full of rich goods; so that he all at once became one of
the richest and most considerable merchants, and lived at his ease. Ali
Baba, on the other hand, who had married a woman as poor as himself,
lived in a very wretched habitation, and had no other means to maintain
his wife and children but his daily labour of cutting wood, and bringing
it to town to sell, upon three asses, which were his whole substance.

One day, when Ali Baba was in the forest, and had just cut wood enough
to load his asses, he saw at a distance a great cloud of dust, which
seemed to be driven toward him: he observed it very attentively, and
distinguished soon after a body of horse. Though there had been no
rumour of robbers in that country, Ali Baba began to think that they
might prove such, and without considering what might become of his
asses, was resolved to save himself. He climbed up a large, thick tree,
whose branches, at a little distance from the ground, were so close to
one another that there was but little space between them. He placed
himself in the middle, from whence he could see all that passed without
being discovered; and the tree stood at the base of a single rock, so
steep and craggy that nobody could climb up it.

The troop, who were all well mounted and armed, came to the foot of this
rock, and there dismounted. Ali Baba counted forty of them, and, from
their looks and equipage, was assured that they were robbers. Nor was he
mistaken in his opinion; for they were a troop of banditti, who, without
doing any harm to the neighbourhood, robbed at a distance, and made that
place their rendezvous; but what confirmed him in his opinion was, that
every man unbridled his horse, tied him to some shrub, and hung about
his neck a bag of corn which they brought behind them. Then each of them
took his saddle wallet, which seemed to Ali Baba to be full of gold and
silver from its weight. One, who was the most personable amongst them,
and whom he took to be their captain, came with his wallet on his back
under the tree in which Ali Baba was concealed, and making his way
through some shrubs, pronounced these words so distinctly: "_Open,
Sesame_," that Ali Baba heard him. As soon as the captain of the robbers
had uttered these words, a door opened in the rock; and after he had
made all his troop enter before him, he followed them, when the door
shut again of itself. The robbers stayed some time within the rock, and
Ali Baba, who feared that some one, or all of them together, might come
out and catch him, if he should endeavour to make his escape, was
obliged to sit patiently in the tree. He was nevertheless tempted to get
down, mount one of their horses, and lead another, driving his asses
before him with all the haste he could to town; but the uncertainty of
the event made him choose the safest course.

At last the door opened again, and the forty robbers came out. As the
captain went in last, he came out first, and stood to see them all pass
by him, when Ali Baba heard him make the door close by pronouncing these
words: "_Shut, Sesame_." Every man went and bridled his horse, fastened
his wallet, and mounted again; and when the captain saw them all ready,
he put himself at their head, and they returned the way they had come.
Ali Baba did not immediately quit his tree; for, said he to himself,
they may have forgotten something and may come back again, and then I
shall be taken. He followed them with his eyes as far as he could see
them; and afterward stayed a considerable time before he descended.
Remembering the words the captain of the robbers used to cause the door
to open and shut, he had the curiosity to try if his pronouncing them
would have the same effect. Accordingly, he went among the shrubs, and
perceiving the door concealed behind them, stood before it, and said:
"_Open, Sesame!"_ The door instantly flew wide open. Ali Baba, who
expected a dark dismal cavern, was surprised to see it well lighted and
spacious, in the form of a vault, which received the light from an
opening at the top of the rock. He saw all sorts of provisions, rich
bales of silk stuff, brocade, and valuable carpeting, piled upon one
another; gold and silver ingots in great heaps, and money in bags. The
sight of all these riches made him suppose that this cave must have been
occupied for ages by robbers, who had succeeded one another. Ali Baba
did not stand long to consider what he should do, but went immediately
into the cave, and as soon as he had entered, the door shut of itself,
but this did not disturb him, because he knew the secret to open it
again. He never regarded the silver, but made the best use of his time
in carrying out as much of the gold coin as he thought his three asses
could carry. He collected his asses, which were dispersed, and when he
had loaded them with the bags, laid wood over in such a manner that they
could not be seen. When he had done he stood before the door, and
pronouncing the words: "_Shut, Sesame!"_ the door closed after him, for
it had shut of itself while he was within, but remained open while he
was out. He then made the best of his way to town.

When Ali Baba got home, he drove his asses into a little yard, shut the
gates very carefully, threw off the wood that covered the bags, carried
them into his house, and ranged them in order before his wife, who sat
on a sofa. His wife handled the bags, and finding them full of money,
suspected that her husband had been robbing, insomuch that she could not
help saying: "Ali Baba, have you been so unhappy as to----" "Be quiet,
wife," interrupted Ali Baba, "do not frighten yourself; I am no robber,
unless he may be one who steals from robbers. You will no longer
entertain an ill opinion of me, when I shall tell you my good fortune."
He then emptied the bags, which raised such a great heap of gold as
dazzled his wife's eyes; and when he had done, told her the whole
adventure from beginning to end; and, above all, recommended her to keep
it secret. The wife, cured of her fears, rejoiced with her husband at
their good fortune, and would count all the gold piece by piece. "Wife,"
replied Ali Baba, "you do not know what you undertake, when you pretend
to count the money; you will never have done. I will dig a hole, and
bury it; there is no time to be lost." "You are in the right, husband,"
replied she; "but let us know, as nigh as possible, how much we have. I
will borrow a small measure in the neighbourhood, and measure it, while
you dig the hole." "What you are going to do is to no purpose, wife,"
said Ali Baba; "if you would take my advice, you had better let it
alone; but keep the secret, and do what you please." Away the wife ran
to her brother-in-law Cassim, who lived just by, but was not then at
home; and addressing herself to his wife, desired her to lend her a
measure for a little while. Her sister-in-law asked her, whether she
would have a great or a small one. The wife asked for a small one. The
sister-in-law agreed to lend one, but as she knew Ali Baba's poverty,
she was curious to know what sort of grain his wife wanted to measure,
and artfully putting some suet at the bottom of the measure, brought it
to her with an excuse, that she was sorry that she had made her stay so
long, but that she could not find it sooner. Ali Baba's wife went home,
set the measure upon the heap of gold, filled it and emptied it often
upon the sofa, till she had done: when she was very well satisfied to
find the number of measures amounted to so many as they did, and went to
tell her husband, who had almost finished digging the hole. While Ali
Baba was burying the gold, his wife, to show her exactness and diligence
to her sister-in-law, carried the measure back again, but without taking
notice that a piece of gold had stuck to the bottom. "Sister," said she,
giving it to her again, "you see that I have not kept your measure long;
I am obliged to you for it, and return it with thanks."

As soon as her sister-in-law was gone, Cassim's wife looked at the
bottom of the measure, and was inexpressibly surprised to find a piece
of gold stuck to it. Envy immediately possessed her breast. "What!" said
she, "has Ali Baba gold so plentiful as to measure it? Where has that
poor wretch got all this wealth?" Cassim, her husband, was not at home,
but at his counting-house, which he left always in the evening. His wife
waited for him, and thought the time an age; so great was her impatience
to tell him the circumstance, at which she guessed he would be as much
surprised as herself.

When Cassim came home, his wife said to him: "Cassim, I know you think
yourself rich, but you are much mistaken; Ali Baba is infinitely richer
than you; he does not count his money, but measures it." Cassim desired
her to explain the riddle, which she did, by telling him the stratagem
she had used to make the discovery, and showed him the piece of money,
which was so old that they could not tell in what prince's reign it was
coined. Cassim, instead of being pleased, conceived a base envy at his
brother's prosperity; he could not sleep all that night, and went to him
in the morning before sunrise, although after he had married the rich
widow, he had never treated him as a brother, but neglected him. "Ali
Baba," said he, accosting him, "you are very reserved in your affairs;
you pretend to be miserably poor, and yet you measure gold." "How,
brother?" replied Ali Baba; "I do not know what you mean: explain
yourself." "Do not pretend ignorance," replied Cassim, showing him the
piece of gold his wife had given him. "How many of these pieces," added
he, "have you? My wife found this at the bottom of the measure you
borrowed yesterday."

By this discourse, Ali Baba perceived that Cassim and his wife, through
his own wife's folly, knew what they had so much reason to conceal; but
what was done could not be recalled; therefore, without shewing the
least surprise or trouble, he confessed all, told his brother by what
chance he had discovered this retreat of the thieves, in what place it
was; and offered him part of his treasure to keep the secret. "I expect
as much," replied Cassim haughtily; "but I must know exactly where this
treasure is, and how I may visit it myself when I choose; otherwise I
will go and inform against you, and then you will not only get no more,
but will lose all you have, and I shall have a share for my
information."

Ali Baba, more out of his natural good temper, than frightened by the
menaces of his unnatural brother, told him all he desired, and even the
very words he was to use to gain admission into the cave.

Cassim, who wanted no more of Ali Baba, left him, resolving to be
beforehand with him, and hoping to get all the treasure to himself. He
rose the next morning long before the sun, and set out for the forest
with ten mules bearing great chests, which he designed to fill; and
followed the road which Ali Baba had pointed out to him. He was not long
before he reached the rock, and found out the place by the tree, and
other marks, which his brother had given him. When he reached the
entrance of the cavern, he pronounced the words: "_Open, Sesame!_" and
the door immediately opened, and when he was in, closed upon him. In
examining the cave, he was in great admiration to find much more riches
than he had apprehended from Ali Baba's account. He was so covetous, and
greedy of wealth, that he could have spent the whole day in feasting his
eyes with so much treasure, if the thought that he came to carry some
away had not hindered him. He laid as many bags of gold as he could
carry at the door of the cavern, but his thoughts were so full of the
great riches he should possess, that he could not think of the necessary
word to make it open, but instead of "_Sesame_," said: "_Open, Barley!_"
and was much amazed to find that the door remained fast shut. He named
several sorts of grain, but still the door would not open. Cassim had
never expected such an incident, and was so alarmed at the danger he was
in, that the more he endeavoured to remember the word "_Sesame_," the
more his memory was confounded, and he had as much forgotten it as if he
had never heard it mentioned. He threw down the bags he had loaded
himself with and walked distractedly up and down the cave, without
having the least regard to the riches that were round him. About noon
the robbers chanced to visit their cave, and at some distance from it
saw Cassim's mules straggling about the rock, with great chests on their
backs. Alarmed at this novelty, they galloped full speed to the cave.
They drove away the mules, which Cassim had neglected to fasten, and
they strayed through the forest so far, that they were soon out of
sight. The robbers never gave themselves the trouble to pursue them,
being more concerned to know to whom they belonged, and while some of
them searched about the rock, the captain and the rest went directly to
the door, with their naked sabres in their hands, and pronouncing the
proper words, it opened.

Cassim, who heard the noise of the horses' feet from the middle of the
cave, never doubted of the arrival of the robbers, and his approaching
death; but was resolved to make one effort to escape from them. To this
end he rushed to the door, and no sooner heard the word _Sesame_, which
he had forgotten, and saw the door open, than he ran out and threw the
leader down, but could not escape the other robbers, who with their
sabres soon deprived him of life. The first care of the robbers after
this was to examine the cave. They found all the bags which Cassim had
brought to the door, to be ready to load his mules, and carried them
again to their places, without missing what Ali Baba had taken away
before. Then holding a council, and deliberating upon this occurrence,
they guessed that Cassim, when he was in, could not get out again; but
could not imagine how he had entered. It came into their heads that he
might have got down by the top of the cave; but the aperture by which it
received light was so high, and the rocks so inaccessible without, that
they gave up this conjecture. That he came in at the door they could not
believe, however, unless he had the secret of making it open. In short,
none of them could imagine which way he had entered; for they were all
persuaded nobody knew their secret, little imagining that Ali Baba had
watched them. It was a matter of the greatest importance to them to
secure their riches. They agreed therefore to cut Cassim's body
into quarters, to hang two on one side and two on the other, within the
door of the cave, to terrify any person who should attempt again to
enter. They had no sooner taken this resolution than they put it in
execution, and when they had nothing more to detain them, left the place
of their hoards well closed. They then mounted their horses, went to
beat the roads again, and to attack the caravans they might meet.

[Illustration]

_Cassim ... was so alarmed at the danger he was in that the more he
endeavoured to remember the word Sesame the more his memory was
confounded._

In the meantime, Cassim's wife was very uneasy when night came, and her
husband was not returned. She ran to Ali Baba in alarm, and said: "I
believe, brother-in-law, that you know Cassim, your brother, is gone to
the forest, and upon what account; it is now night, and he is not
returned; I am afraid some misfortune has happened to him." Ali Baba,
who had expected that his brother, after what he had said, would go to
the forest, had declined going himself that day, for fear of giving him
any umbrage; therefore told her, without any reflection upon her
husband's unhandsome behaviour, that she need not frighten herself, for
that certainly Cassim would not think it proper to come into the town
till the night should be pretty far advanced.

Cassim's wife, considering how much it concerned her husband to keep the
business secret, was the more easily persuaded to believe her
brother-in-law. She went home again, and waited patiently till midnight.
She repented of her foolish curiosity, and cursed her desire of
penetrating into the affairs of her brother and sister-in-law. She spent
all the night in weeping; and as soon as it was day, went to them,
telling them, by her tears, the cause of her coming. Ali Baba did not
wait for his sister-in-law to desire him to go and see what was become
of Cassim, but departed immediately with his three asses, begging of her
first to moderate her affliction. He went to the forest, and when he
came near the rock, having seen neither his brother nor the mules in his
way, was seriously alarmed at finding some blood spilt near the door,
which he took for an ill omen; but when he had pronounced the word, and
the door had opened, he was struck with horror at the dismal sight of
his brother's body. Without adverting to the little fraternal affection
his brother had shewn for him, Ali Baba went into the cave to find
something to enshroud his remains, and having loaded one of his asses
with them, covered them over with wood. The other two asses he loaded
with bags of gold, covering them with wood also as before; and then
bidding the door shut, came away; but was so cautious as to stop some
time at the end of the forest, that he might not go into the town before
night. When he came home, he drove the two asses loaded with gold into
his little yard, and left the care of unloading them to his wife, while
he led the other to his sister-in-law's house.

Ali Baba knocked at the door, which was opened by Morgiana, an
intelligent slave, fruitful in inventions to insure success in the most
difficult undertakings: and Ali Baba knew her to be such. When he came
into the court, he unloaded the ass, and taking Morgiana aside, said to
her: "The first thing I ask of you is an inviolable secrecy, both for
your mistress's sake and mine. Your master's body is contained in these
two bundles, and our business is, to bury him as if he had died a
natural death. Go, tell your mistress I want to speak with her; and mind
what I have said to you."

Morgiana went to her mistress, and Ali Baba followed her. "Well,
brother," said she, with impatience, "what news do you bring me of my
husband? I perceive no comfort in your countenance." "Sister," answered
Ali Baba, "I cannot satisfy your inquiries unless you hear my story
without speaking a word; for it is of as great importance to you as to
me to keep what has happened secret." "Alas!" said she, "this preamble
lets me know that my husband is not to be found; but at the same time I
know the necessity of secrecy, and I must constrain myself: say on, I
will hear you."

Ali Baba then detailed the incidents of his journey, till he came to the
finding of Cassim's body. "Now," said he, "sister, I have something to
relate which will afflict you the more, because it is what you so little
expect; but it cannot now be remedied; if my endeavours can comfort you,
I offer to put that which God hath sent me to what you have, and marry
you: assuring you that my wife will not be jealous, and that we shall
live happily together. If this proposal is agreeable to you, we must
think of acting so that my brother should appear to have died a natural
death. I think you may leave the management of the business to Morgiana,
and I will contribute all that lies in my power to your consolation."
What could Cassim's widow do better than accept of this proposal? for
though her first husband had left behind him a plentiful substance, his
brother was now much richer, and by the discovery of this treasure might
be still more so. Instead, therefore, of rejecting the offer, she
regarded it as the sure means of comfort; and drying up her tears, which
had begun to flow abundantly, and suppressing the outcries usual with
women who have lost their husbands, showed Ali Baba that she approved of
his proposal. Ali Baba left the widow, recommended to Morgiana to act
her part well, and then returned home with his ass.

Morgiana went out at the same time to an apothecary, and asked for a
sort of lozenges which he prepared, and were very efficacious in the
most dangerous disorders. The apothecary inquired who was ill at her
master's? She replied with a sigh, her good master Cassim himself: that
they knew not what his disorder was, but that he could neither eat nor
speak. After these words, Morgiana carried the lozenges home with her,
and the next morning went to the same apothecary's again, and with tears
in her eyes, asked for an essence which they used to give to sick people
only when at the last extremity. "Alas!" said she, taking it from the
apothecary, "I am afraid that this remedy will have no better effect
than the lozenges; and that I shall lose my good master." On the other
hand, as Ali Baba and his wife were often seen to go between Cassim's
and their own house all that day, and to seem melancholy, nobody was
surprised in the evening to hear the lamentable shrieks and cries of
Cassim's wife and Morgiana, who gave out everywhere that her master was
dead. The next morning, soon after day appeared, Morgiana, who knew a
certain old cobbler that opened his stall early, before other people,
went to him, and bidding him good morrow, put a piece of gold into his
hand. "Well," said Baba Mustapha, which was his name, and who was a
merry old fellow, looking at the gold, "this is good hansel: what must I
do for it? I am ready."

"Baba Mustapha," said Morgiana, "you must take with you your sewing
tackle, and go with me; but I must tell you, I shall blindfold you when
you come to such a place." Baba Mustapha seemed to hesitate a little at
these words. "Oh! oh!" replied he, "you would have me do something
against my conscience or against my honour?" "God forbid!" said
Morgiana, putting another piece of gold into his hand, "that I should
ask anything that is contrary to your honour; only come along with me,
and fear nothing."

Baba Mustapha went with Morgiana, who, after she had bound his eyes with
a handkerchief, conveyed him to her deceased master's house, and never
unloosed his eyes till he had entered the room where she had put the
corpse together. "Baba Mustapha," said she, "you must make haste and sew
these quarters together; and when you have done, I will give you another
piece of gold." After Baba Mustapha had finished his task, she
blindfolded him again, gave him the third piece of gold as she had
promised, and recommending secrecy to him, carried him back to the place
where she first bound his eyes, pulled off the bandage, and let him go
home, but watched him that he returned toward his stall, till he was
quite out of sight, for fear he should have the curiosity to return and
track her.

By the time Morgiana had warmed some water to wash the body, Ali Baba
came with incense to embalm it, after which it was sewn up in a
winding-sheet. Not long after, the joiner, according to Ali Baba's
orders, brought the bier, which Morgiana received at the door, and
helped Ali Baba to put the body into it; when she went to the mosque to
inform the imaum that they were ready. The people of the mosque, whose
business it was to wash the dead, offered to perform their duty, but she
told them that it was done already. Morgiana had scarcely got home
before the imaum and the other ministers of the mosque arrived. Four
neighbours carried the corpse on their shoulders to the burying-ground,
following the imaum, who recited some prayers. Morgiana, as a slave to
the deceased, followed the corpse, weeping, beating her breast, and
tearing her hair; and Ali Baba came after with some neighbours, who
often relieved the others in carrying the corpse to the burying-ground.
Cassim's wife stayed at home mourning, uttering lamentable cries with
the women of the neighbourhood, who came according to custom during the
funeral, and joining their lamentations with hers, filled the quarter
far and near with sorrow. In this manner Cassim's melancholy death was
concealed and hushed up between Ali Baba, his wife, Cassim's widow, and
Morgiana, with so much contrivance, that nobody in the city had the
least knowledge or suspicion of the cause of it.

Three or four days after the funeral, Ali Baba removed his few goods
openly to the widow's house; but the money he had taken from the robbers
he conveyed thither by night: soon after the marriage with his
sister-in-law was published, and as these marriages are common in the
Mussulman religion, nobody was surprised. As for Cassim's warehouse, Ali
Baba gave it to his own eldest son, promising that if he managed it
well, he would soon give him a fortune to marry very advantageously
according to his situation.

Let us now leave Ali Baba to enjoy the beginning of his good fortune,
and return to the forty robbers. They came again at the appointed time
to visit their retreat in the forest; but great was their surprise to
find Cassim's body taken away, with some of their bags of gold. "We are
certainly discovered," said the captain, "and if we do not speedily
apply some remedy, shall gradually lose all the riches which we have,
with so much pains and danger, been so many years amassing together. All
that we can think of the loss which we have sustained is, that the thief
whom we surprised had the secret of opening the door, and we arrived
luckily as he was coming out: but his body being removed, and with it
some of our money, plainly shows that he had an accomplice; and as it is
likely that there were but two who had discovered our secret, and one
has been caught, we must look narrowly after the other. What say you, my
lads?" All the robbers thought the captain's proposal so advisable, that
they unanimously approved of it, and agreed that they must lay all other
enterprises aside, to follow this closely, and not give it up till they
had succeeded.

"I expected no less," said the captain, "from your fidelity: but, first
of all, one of you who is artful, and enterprising, must go into the
town disguised as a traveller, to try if he can hear any talk of the
strange death of the man whom we have killed, as he deserved; and
endeavour to find out who he was, and where he lived. This is a matter
of the first importance for us to ascertain, that we may do nothing
which we may have reason to repent of, by discovering ourselves in a
country where we have lived so long unknown. But to warn him who shall
take upon himself this commission, and to prevent our being deceived by
his giving us a false report, I ask you all, if you do not think that in
case of treachery, or even error of judgment, he should suffer death?"
Without waiting for the suffrages of his companions, one of the robbers
started up, and said: "I submit to this condition, and think it an
honour to expose my life, by taking the commission upon me; but
remember, at least, if I do not succeed, that I neither wanted courage
nor good will to serve the troop." After this robber had received great
commendations from the captain, he disguised himself, and taking his
leave of the troop that night, went into the town just at daybreak; and
walked up and down, till accidentally he came to Baba Mustapha's stall,
which was always open before any of the shops.

Baba Mustapha was seated with an awl in his hand, just going to work.
The robber saluted him, bidding him good morrow; and perceiving that he
was old, said: "Honest man, you begin to work very early: is it possible
that one of your age can see so well? I question, even if it were
somewhat lighter, whether you could see to stitch."

"Certainly," replied Baba Mustapha, "you must be a stranger, and do not
know me; for old as I am, I have extraordinarily good eyes; and you will
not doubt it when I tell you that I sewed a dead body together in a
place where I had not so much light as I have now." The robber was
overjoyed to think that he had addressed himself, at his first coming
into the town, to a man who in all probability could give him the
intelligence he wanted. "A dead body!" replied he with affected
amazement. "What could you sew up a dead body for? You mean you sewed up
his winding-sheet." "No, no," answered Baba Mustapha, "I perceive your
meaning; you want to have me speak out, but you shall know no more." The
robber wanted no farther assurance to be persuaded that he had
discovered what he sought. He pulled out a piece of gold, and putting it
into Baba Mustapha's hand, said to him: "I do not want to learn your
secret, though I can assure you I would not divulge it, if you trusted
me with it; the only thing which I desire of you is, to do me the favour
to shew me the house where you stitched up the dead body."

"If I were disposed to do you that favour," replied Baba Mustapha,
holding the money in his hand, ready to return it, "I assure you I
cannot. I was taken to a certain place, where I was blinded, I was then
led to the house, and afterward brought back again in the same manner;
you see, therefore, the impossibility of my doing what you desire."

"Well," replied the robber, "you may, however, remember a little of the
way that you were led blindfolded. Come, let me blind your eyes at the
same place. We will walk together; perhaps you may recognise some part;
and as everybody ought to be paid for his trouble, there is another
piece of gold for you; gratify me in what I ask you." So saying, he put
another piece of gold into his hand.

The two pieces of gold were great temptations to Baba Mustapha. He
looked at them a long time in his hand, without saying a word, thinking
with himself what he should do; but at last he pulled out his purse,
and put them in. "I cannot assure you," said he to the robber, "that I
can remember the way exactly; but since you desire, I will try what I
can do." At these words Baba Mustapha rose up, to the great joy of the
robber, and without shutting his shop, where he had nothing valuable to
lose, he led the robber to the place where Morgiana had bound his eyes.
"It was here," said Baba Mustapha, "I was blindfolded; and I turned as
you see me." The robber, who had his handkerchief ready, tied it over
his eyes, walked by him till he stopped, partly leading, and partly
guided by him. "I think," said Baba Mustapha, "I went no farther," and
he had now stopped directly at Cassim's house, where Ali Baba then
lived. The thief, before he pulled off the band, marked the door with a
piece of chalk, which he had ready in his hand; and then asked him if he
knew whose house that was; to which Baba Mustapha replied, that as he
did not live in that neighbourhood he could not tell. The robber,
finding he could discover no more from Baba Mustapha, thanked him for
the trouble he had taken, and left him to go back to his stall, while he
returned to the forest, persuaded that he should be very well received.
A little after the robber and Baba Mustapha had parted, Morgiana went
out of Ali Baba's house upon some errand, and upon her return, seeing
the mark the robber had made, stopped to observe it. "What can be the
meaning of this mark?" said she to herself. "Somebody intends my master
no good: however, with whatever intention it was done, it is advisable
to guard against the worst." Accordingly, she fetched a piece of chalk,
and marked two or three doors on each side in the same manner, without
saying a word to her master or mistress.

In the meantime the thief rejoined his troop in the forest, and
recounted to them his success. All the robbers listened to him with the
utmost satisfaction; when the captain, after commending his diligence,
addressing himself to them all, said: "Comrades, we have no time to
lose: let us set off well armed; but that we may not excite any
suspicion, let only one or two go into the town together, and join at
our rendezvous, which shall be the great square. In the meantime, our
comrade who brought us the good news, and I, will go and find out the
house, that we may consult what had best be done."

This plan was approved of by all, and they were soon ready. They filed
off in parties of two each, and got into the town without being in the
least suspected. The captain, and he who had visited the town in the
morning as spy, came in the last. He led the captain into the street
where he had marked Ali Baba's residence; and when they came to the
first of the houses which Morgiana had marked, he pointed it out. But
the captain observed that the next door was chalked in the same manner:
and shewing it to his guide, asked him which house it was, that, or the
first? The guide was so confounded, that he knew not what answer to
make; but still more puzzled, when he saw five or six houses similarly
marked. He assured the captain, with an oath, that he had marked but
one, and could not tell who had chalked the rest so that he could not
distinguish the house which the cobbler had stopped at.

The captain, finding that their design had proved abortive, went
directly to the place of rendezvous, and told the first of his troop
whom he met that they had lost their labour, and must return to their
cave. When the troop was all got together, the captain told them the
reason of their returning; and presently the conductor was declared by
all worthy of death. He condemned himself, acknowledging that he ought
to have taken better precaution, and prepared to receive the stroke from
him who was appointed to cut off his head. Another of the gang, who
promised himself that he should succeed better, immediately presented
himself, and his offer being accepted, he went and corrupted Baba
Mustapha, as the other had done; and being shewn the house, marked it in
a place more remote from sight, with red chalk.

Not long after, Morgiana, whose eyes nothing could escape, went out, and
seeing the red chalk, and arguing with herself as she had done before,
marked the other neighbours' houses in the same place and manner. The
robber, at his return to his company, valued himself much on the
precaution he had taken, which he looked upon as an infallible way of
distinguishing Ali Baba's house from the others; and the captain and all
of them thought it must succeed. They conveyed themselves into the town
with the same precaution as before; but when the robber and his captain
came to the street, they found the same difficulty: at which the captain
was enraged, and the robber in as great confusion as his predecessor.
Thus the captain and his troop were forced to retire a second time, and
much more dissatisfied; while the unfortunate robber, who had been the
author of the mistake, underwent the same punishment; which he willingly
submitted to.

The captain, having lost two brave fellows of his troop, was afraid of
diminishing it too much by pursuing this plan to get information of the
residence of their plunderer. He found by their example that their heads
were not so good as their hands on such occasions; and therefore
resolved to take upon himself the important commission. Accordingly, he
went and addressed himself to Baba Mustapha, who did him the same
service he had done to the other robbers. He did not set any particular
mark on the house, but examined and observed it so carefully, by
passing often by it, that it was impossible for him to mistake it.

The captain, well satisfied with his attempt, and informed of what he
wanted to know, returned to the forest; and when he came into the cave,
where the troop waited for him, said: "Now, comrades, nothing can
prevent our full revenge, as I am certain of the house, and in my way
hither I have thought how to put it into execution, but if any one can
form a better expedient, let him communicate it." He then told them his
contrivance; and as they approved of it, ordered them to go into the
villages about, and buy nineteen mules, with thirty-eight large leather
jars, one full of oil, and the others empty. In two or three days' time
the robbers had purchased the mules and jars, and as the mouths of the
jars were rather too narrow for his purpose, the captain caused them to
be widened; and after having put one of his men into each, with the
weapons which he thought fit, leaving open the seam which had been
undone to leave them room to breathe, he rubbed the jars on the outside
with oil from the full vessel. Things being thus prepared, when the
nineteen mules were loaded with thirty-seven robbers in jars, and the
jar of oil, the captain, as their driver, set out with them, and reached
the town by the dusk of the evening, as he had intended. He led them
through the streets till he came to Ali Baba's, at whose door he
designed to have knocked; but was prevented by his sitting there after
supper to take a little fresh air. He stopped his mules, addressed
himself to him, and said: "I have brought some oil a great way, to sell
at to-morrow's market; and it is now so late that I do not know where to
lodge. If I should not be troublesome to you, do me the favour to let me
pass the night with you, and I shall be very much obliged by your
hospitality."

Though Ali Baba had seen the captain of the robbers in the forest, and
had heard him speak, it was hardly possible to know him in the disguise
of an oil-merchant. He told him he should be welcome, and immediately
opened his gates for the mules to go into the yard. At the same time he
called to a slave, and ordered him, when the mules were unloaded, to put
them into the stable, and give them fodder; and then went to Morgiana,
to bid her get a good supper. He did more. When he saw the captain had
unloaded his mules, and that they were put into the stables as he had
ordered, and he was looking for a place to pass the night in the air, he
brought him into the hall where he received his company, telling him he
would not suffer him to be in the court. The captain excused himself on
pretence of not being troublesome; but really to have room to execute
his design, and it was not till after the most pressing importunity that
he yielded. Ali Baba, not content to keep company, till supper was
ready, with the man who had a design on his life, continued talking with
him till it was ended, and repeating his offer of service. The captain
rose up at the same time with his host; and while Ali Baba went to speak
to Morgiana he withdrew into the yard, under pretence of looking at his
mules. Ali Baba, after charging Morgiana afresh to take care of his
guest, said to her: "To-morrow morning I design to go to the bath before
day; take care my bathing linens be ready, give them to Abdoollah,"
which was the slave's name, "and make me some good broth against I
return." After this he went to bed.

In the meantime, the captain went from the stable to give his people
orders what to do; and beginning at the first jar, and so on to the
last, said to each man: "As soon as I throw some stones out of the
chamber window where I lie, do not fail to cut the jar open with the
knife you have about you for the purpose, and come out, and I will
immediately join you." After this he returned into the house, when
Morgiana, taking up a light, conducted him to his chamber, where she
left him; and he, to avoid any suspicion, put the light out soon after,
and laid himself down in his clothes, that he might be the more ready to
rise.

Morgiana, remembering Ali Baba's orders, got his bathing linens ready,
and ordered Abdoollah to set on the pot for the broth; but while she was
preparing it, the lamp went out, and there was no more oil in the house,
nor any candles. What to do she did not know, for the broth must be
made. Abdoollah seeing her very uneasy, said: "Do not fret and tease
yourself, but go into the yard, and take some oil out of one of the
jars." Morgiana thanked Abdoollah for his advice, took the oil-pot, and
went into the yard; when as she came nigh the first jar, the robber
within said softly: "Is it time?" Though the robber spoke low, Morgiana
was struck with the voice the more, because the captain, when he
unloaded the mules, had taken the lids off this and all the other jars
to give air to his men, who were ill enough at their ease, almost
wanting room to breathe. As much surprised as Morgiana naturally was at
finding a man in a jar, instead of the oil she wanted, many would have
made such an outcry as to have given an alarm; whereas Morgiana
comprehending immediately the importance of keeping silence, and the
necessity of applying a speedy remedy without noise, conceived at once
the means, and collecting herself without shewing the least emotion,
answered: "Not yet, but presently." She went in this manner to all the
jars, giving the same answer, till she came to the jar of oil.

By this means, Morgiana found that her master Ali Baba, who thought that
he had entertained an oil merchant, had admitted thirty-eight robbers
into his house, regarding this pretended merchant as their captain. She
made what haste she could to fill her oil-pot, and returned into her
kitchen; where, as soon as she had lighted her lamp, she took a great
kettle, went again to the oil-jar, filled the kettle, set it on a large
wood-fire, and as soon as it boiled went and poured enough into every
jar to stifle and destroy the robber within.

When this action, worthy of the courage of Morgiana, was executed
without any noise, she returned into the kitchen with the empty kettle;
and having put out the great fire she had made to boil the oil, and
leaving just enough to make the broth, put out the lamp also, and
remained silent; resolving not to go to rest till she had observed what
might follow through a window of the kitchen, which opened into the
yard.

She had not waited long before the captain of the robbers got up, opened
the window, and finding no light, and hearing no noise, or any one
stirring in the house, gave the appointed signal, by throwing little
stones, several of which hit the jars, as he doubted not by the sound
they gave. He then listened, but not hearing or perceiving anything
whereby he could judge that his companions stirred, he began to grow
very uneasy, threw stones again a second and also a third time, and
could not comprehend the reason that none of them should answer his
signal. Much alarmed, he went softly down into the yard, and going to
the first jar, whilst asking the robber, whom he thought alive, if he
was in readiness, smelt the hot boiled oil, which sent forth a steam out
of the jar. Hence he suspected that his plot to murder Ali Baba and
plunder his house was discovered. Examining all the jars one after
another, he found that all the members of his gang were dead; and by the
oil he missed out of the last jar guessed the means and manner of their
death. Enraged to despair at having failed in his design, he forced the
lock of a door that led from the yard to the garden, and climbing over
the walls, made his escape.

When Morgiana heard no noise, and found, after waiting some time, that
the captain did not return, she concluded that he had chosen rather to
make his escape by the garden than the street door, which was
double-locked. Satisfied and pleased to have succeeded so well, in
saving her master and family, she went to bed.

Ali Baba rose before day, and, followed by his slave, went to the baths,
entirely ignorant of the important event which had happened at home; for
Morgiana had not thought it safe to wake him before, for fear of losing
her opportunity; and after her successful exploit she thought it
needless to disturb him.

When he returned from the baths, the sun was risen; he was very much
surprised to see the oil jars and that the merchant was not gone with
the mules. He asked Morgiana, who opened the door, and had let all
things stand as they were, that he might see them, the reason of it. "My
good master," answered she, "God preserve you and all your family; you
will be better informed of what you wish to know when you have seen what
I have to show you, if you will but give yourself the trouble to follow
me."

As soon as Morgiana had shut the door, Ali Baba followed her; when she
requested him to look into the first jar and see if there was any oil.
Ali Baba did so, and seeing a man, started back in alarm, and cried out.
"Do not be afraid," said Morgiana; "the man you see there can neither do
you nor anybody else any harm. He is dead." "Ah, Morgiana!" said Ali
Baba, "what is it you show me? Explain yourself." "I will," replied
Morgiana; "moderate your astonishment, and do not excite the curiosity
of your neighbours. Look into all the other jars."

Ali Baba examined all the other jars, and when he came to that which had
the oil in, found it prodigiously sunk, and stood for some time
motionless, sometimes looking at the jars, and sometimes at Morgiana,
without saying a word, so great was his surprise: at last, when he had
recovered himself, he said: "And what is become of the merchant?"

"Merchant!" answered she, "he is as much one as I am; I will tell you
who he is, and what is become of him: but you had better hear the story
in your own chamber; for it is time for your health that you had your
broth after your bathing."

While Ali Baba retired to his chamber, Morgiana went into the kitchen to
fetch the broth, but before he would drink it, he first entreated her to
satisfy his impatience, and tell him what had happened, with all the
circumstances; and she obeyed him.

"This," she said, when she had completed her story, "is the account you
asked of me; and I am convinced it is the consequence of what I observed
some days ago, but did not think fit to acquaint you with; for when I
came in one morning early I found our street door marked with white
chalk, and the next morning with red; upon which, both times without
knowing what was the intention of those chalks, I marked two or three
neighbours' doors on each side in the same manner. If you reflect on
this, and what has since happened, you will find it to be a plot of the
robbers of the forest, of whose gang there are two wanting, and now they
are reduced to three: all this shows that they had sworn your
destruction, and it is proper you should be upon your guard, while there
is one of them alive: for my part, I shall neglect nothing necessary to
your preservation, as I am in duty bound."

When Morgiana had left off speaking, Ali Baba was so sensible of the
great service she had done him, that he said to her: "I will not die
without rewarding you as you deserve; I owe my life to you, and for the
first token of my acknowledgment, give you your liberty from this
moment, till I can complete your recompense as I intend. I am persuaded
with you, that the forty robbers have laid snares for my destruction.
God, by your means, has delivered me from them as yet, and I hope will
continue to preserve me from their wicked designs, and deliver the world
from their persecution. All that we have to do is to bury the bodies of
these pests of mankind immediately, and with all the secrecy imaginable,
that nobody may suspect what is become of them. But that labour
Abdoollah and I will undertake."

Ali Baba's garden was very long, and shaded at the farther end by a
great number of large trees. Under these he and the slave dug a trench,
long and wide enough to hold all the robbers. Afterward they lifted the
bodies out of the jars, took away their weapons, carried them to the end
of the garden, laid them in the trench, and levelled the ground again.
When this was done, Ali Baba hid the jars and weapons; and as he had no
occasion for the mules, he sent them at different times to be sold in
the market by his slave.

While Ali Baba took these measures to prevent the public from knowing
how he came by his riches in so short a time, the captain of the forty
robbers returned to the forest with inconceivable mortification; and in
his confusion at his ill success, so contrary to what he had promised
himself, entered the cave, not being able, all the way from the town, to
come to any resolution how to revenge himself of Ali Baba.

The loneliness of the gloomy cavern became frightful to him. "Where are
you, my brave lads," cried he, "old companions of my watchings, inroads,
and labour? What can I do without you? Did I collect you only to lose
you by so base a fate, and so unworthy of your courage! Had you died
with your sabres in your hands, like brave men, my regret had been less!
When shall I enlist so gallant a troop again? And if I could, can I
undertake it without exposing so much gold and treasure to him who hath
already enriched himself out of it? I cannot, I ought not to think of
it, before I have taken away his life. I will undertake that alone,
which I could not accomplish with your powerful assistance; and when I
have taken measures to secure this treasure from being pillaged, I will
provide for it new masters and successors after me, who shall preserve
and augment it to all posterity." This resolution being taken, he was
not at a loss how to execute his purpose; but full of hopes, slept all
that night very quietly.

When he awoke early next morning, he dressed himself, agreeably to the
project he had formed, went to the town, and took a lodging in a khan.
As he expected what had happened at Ali Baba's might make a great noise,
he asked his host what news there was in the city? Upon which the
innkeeper told him a great many circumstances, which did not concern him
in the least. He judged by this, that the reason why Ali Baba kept his
affairs so secret, was for fear people should know where the treasure
lay; and because he knew his life would be sought on account of it. This
urged him the more to neglect nothing to rid himself of so cautious an
enemy.

The captain now assumed the character of a merchant, and conveyed
gradually a great many sorts of rich stuffs and fine linen to his
lodging from the cavern, but with all the necessary precautions
imaginable to conceal the place whence he brought them. In order to
dispose of the merchandise, when he had amassed them together, he took a
warehouse, which happened to be opposite to Cassim's, which Ali Baba's
son had occupied since the death of his uncle.

He took the name of Khaujeh Houssain, and as a newcomer, was, according
to custom, extremely civil and complaisant to all the merchants his
neighbours. Ali Baba's son was from his vicinity one of the first to
converse with Khaujeh Houssain, who strove to cultivate his friendship
more particularly when, two or three days after he was settled, he
recognised Ali Baba, who came to see his son, and stopped to talk with
him as he was accustomed to do. When he was gone, the impostor learnt
from his son who he was. He increased his assiduities, caressed him in
the most engaging manner, made him some small presents, and often asked
him to dine and sup with him.

Ali Baba's son did not choose to lie under such obligation to Khaujeh
Houssain, without making the like return; but was so much straitened for
want of room in his house, that he could not entertain him so well as he
wished; he therefore acquainted his father Ali Baba with his intention,
and told him that it did not look well for him to receive such favours
from Khaujeh Houssain without inviting him in return.

Ali Baba, with great pleasure, took the treat upon himself. "Son," said
he, "to-morrow being Friday, which is a day that the shops of such great
merchants as Khaujeh Houssain and yourself are shut, get him to take a
walk with you, and as you come back, pass by my door and call in. It
will look better to have it happen accidentally, than if you gave him a
formal invitation. I will go and order Morgiana to provide a supper."

The next day Ali Baba's son and Khaujeh Houssain met by appointment,
took their walk, and as they returned, Ali Baba's son led Khaujeh
Houssain through the street where his father lived; and when they came
to the house, stopped and knocked at the door. "This, sir," said he, "is
my father's house; who, from the account I have given him of your
friendship, charged me to procure him the honour of your acquaintance."

Though it was the sole aim of Khaujeh Houssain to introduce himself into
Ali Baba's house, that he might kill him without hazarding his own life
or making any noise; yet he excused himself, and offered to take his
leave. But a slave having opened the door, Ali Baba's son took him
obligingly by the hand, and in a manner forced him in.

Ali Baba received Khaujeh Houssain with a smiling countenance, and in
the most obliging manner. He thanked him for all the favours he had done
his son; adding withal, the obligation was the greater, as he was a
young man not much acquainted with the world.

Khaujeh Houssain returned the compliment, by assuring Ali Baba, that
though his son might not have acquired the experience of older men, he
had good sense equal to the knowledge of many others. After a little
more conversation on different subjects, he offered again to take his
leave; when Ali Baba, stopping him, said: "Where are you going, sir, in
so much haste? I beg you would do me the honour to sup with me, though
what I have to give you is not worth your acceptance; but such as it is,
I hope you will accept it as heartily as I give it." "Sir," replied
Khaujeh Houssain, "I am thoroughly persuaded of your good will; and if I
ask the favour of you not to take it ill that I do not accept your
obliging invitation, I beg of you to believe that it does not proceed
from any slight or intention to affront, but from a reason which you
would approve if you knew it.

"And what may that reason be, sir," replied Ali Baba, "if I may be so
bold as to ask you?" "It is," answered Khaujeh Houssain, "that I can eat
no victuals that have any salt in them; therefore judge how I should
feel at your table." "If that is the only reason," said Ali Baba, "it
ought not to deprive me of the honour of your company at supper; for, in
the first place, there is no salt ever put into my bread, and as to the
meat we shall have to-night, I promise you there shall be none in that.
Therefore you must do me the favour to stay. I will return immediately."

Ali Baba went into the kitchen, and ordered Morgiana to put no salt to
the meat that was to be dressed that night; and to make quickly two or
three ragouts besides what he had ordered, but be sure to put no salt in
them.

Morgiana, who was always ready to obey her master, could not help
seeming somewhat dissatisfied at his strange order. "Who is this
difficult man," said she, "who eats no salt with his meat? Your supper
will be spoiled, if I keep it back so long." "Do not be angry,
Morgiana," replied Ali Baba; "he is an honest man; therefore do as I bid
you."

Morgiana obeyed, though with no little reluctance, and had a curiosity
to see this man who ate no salt. To this end, when she had finished what
she had to do in the kitchen, she helped Abdoollah to carry up the
dishes; and looking at Khaujeh Houssain, knew him at first sight,
notwithstanding his disguise, to be the captain of the robbers, and
examining him very carefully, perceived that he had a dagger under his
garment. "I am not in the least amazed," said she to herself, "that this
wicked wretch, who is my master's greatest enemy, would eat no salt with
him, since he intends to assassinate him; but I will prevent him."

Morgiana, while they were eating, made the necessary preparations for
executing one of the boldest acts ever meditated, and had just
determined, when Abdoollah came for the dessert of fruit, which she
carried up, and as soon as he had taken the meat away, set upon the
table; after that, she placed three glasses by Ali Baba, and going out,
took Abdoollah with her to sup, and to give Ali Baba the more liberty of
conversation with his guest.

Khaujeh Houssain, or rather the captain of the robbers, thought he had
now a favourable opportunity of being revenged on Ali Baba. "I will,"
said he to himself, "make the father and son both drunk: the son, whose
life I intend to spare, will not be able to prevent my stabbing his
father to the heart; and while the slaves are at supper, or asleep in
the kitchen, I can make my escape over the gardens as before."

Instead of going to supper, Morgiana, who had penetrated the intentions
of the counterfeit Khaujeh Houssain, would not give him time to put his
villainous design into execution, but dressed herself neatly with a
suitable head-dress like a dancer, girded her waist with a silver-gilt
girdle, to which there hung a poniard with a hilt and guard of the same
metal, and put a handsome mask on her face. When she had thus disguised
herself, she said to Abdoollah: "Take your tabor, and let us go and
divert our master and his son's guest, as we do sometimes when he is
alone."

Abdoollah took his tabor and played all the way into the hall before
Morgiana, who when she came to the door made a low obeisance, with a
deliberate air, in order to draw attention, and by way of asking leave
to exhibit her skill. Abdoollah, seeing that his master had a mind to
say something, left off playing. "Come in, Morgiana," said Ali Baba,
"and let Khaujeh Houssain see what you can do, that he may tell us what
he thinks of you. But, sir," said he, turning toward his guest, "do not
think that I put myself to any expense to give you this diversion, since
these are my slave and my cook and housekeeper; and I hope you will not
find the entertainment they give us disagreeable."

Khaujeh Houssain, who did not expect this diversion after supper, began
to fear he should not be able to improve the opportunity he thought he
had found: but hoped, if he now missed his aim, to secure it another
time, by keeping up a friendly correspondence with the father and son;
therefore, though he could have wished Ali Baba would have declined the
dance, he had the complaisance to express his satisfaction at what he
saw pleased his host.

As soon as Abdoollah saw that Ali Baba and Khaujeh Houssain had done
talking, he began to play on the tabor, and accompanied it with an air;
to which Morgiana, who was an excellent performer, danced in such a
manner as would have created admiration in any other company besides
that before which she now exhibited, among whom, perhaps, none but the
false Khaujeh Houssain was in the least attentive to her, the rest
having seen her so frequently.

After she had danced several dances with equal propriety and grace, she
drew the poniard, and holding it in her hand, began a dance, in which
she outdid herself, by the many different figures, light movements, and
the surprising leaps and wonderful exertions with which she accompanied
it. Sometimes she presented the poniard to one person's breast,
sometimes to another's, and oftentimes seemed to strike her own. At
last, as if she was out of breath, she snatched the tabor from Abdoollah
with her left hand, and holding the dagger in her right, presented the
other side of the tabor, after the manner of those who get a livelihood
by dancing, and solicit the liberality of the spectators.

Ali Baba put a piece of gold into the tabor, as did also his son: and
Khaujeh Houssain, seeing that she was coming to him, had pulled his
purse out of his bosom to make her a present; but while he was putting
his hand into it, Morgiana, with a courage and resolution worthy of
herself, plunged the poniard into his heart. Ali Baba and his son,
shocked at this action, cried out aloud. "Unhappy wretch!" exclaimed Ali
Baba, "what have you done to ruin me and my family?" "It was to
preserve, not to ruin you," answered Morgiana; "for see here," continued
she (opening the pretended Khaujeh Houssain's garment, and showing the
dagger), "what an enemy you had entertained! Look well at him, and you
will find him to be both the fictitious oil-merchant, and the captain of
the gang of forty robbers. Remember, too, that he would eat no salt with
you; and what would you have more to persuade you of his wicked design?
Before I saw him, I suspected him as soon as you told me you had such a
guest. I knew him, and you now find that my suspicion was not
groundless."

Ali Baba, who immediately felt the new obligation he had to Morgiana for
saving his life a second time, embraced her: "Morgiana," said he, "I
gave you your liberty, and then promised you that my gratitude should
not stop there, but that I would soon give you higher proofs of its
sincerity, which I now do by making you my daughter-in-law." Then
addressing himself to his son, he said: "I believe you, son, to be so
dutiful a child, that you will not refuse Morgiana for your wife. You
see that Khaujeh Houssain sought your friendship with a treacherous
design to take away my life; and, if he had succeeded, there is no doubt
but he would have sacrificed you also to his revenge. Consider, that by
marrying Morgiana you marry the preserver of my family and your own."

The son, far from showing any dislike, readily consented to the
marriage; not only because he would not disobey his father, but also
because it was agreeable to his inclination.

After this, they thought of burying the captain of the robbers with his
comrades, and did it so privately that nobody discovered their bones
till many years after, when no one had any concern in the publication of
this remarkable history.

A few days afterward, Ali Baba celebrated the nuptials of his son and
Morgiana with great solemnity, a sumptuous feast, and the usual dancing
and spectacles; and had the satisfaction to see that his friends and
neighbours, whom he invited, had no knowledge of the true motives of the
marriage; but that those who were not unacquainted with Morgiana's good
qualities commended his generosity and goodness of heart.

Ali Baba forbore, after this marriage, from going again to the robbers'
cave, as he had done, for fear of being surprised, from the time he had
brought away his brother Cassim's mangled remains. He had kept away
after the death of the thirty-seven robbers and their captain, supposing
the other two, whom he could get no account of, might be alive.

At the year's end, when he found that they had not made any attempt to
disturb him, he had the curiosity to make another journey, taking the
necessary precautions for his safety. He mounted his horse, and when he
came to the cave, and saw no footsteps of men or beasts, looked upon it
as a good sign. He alighted, tied his horse to a tree, then approaching
the entrance and pronouncing the words, _Open, Sesame!_ the door opened.
He entered the cavern, and by the condition he found things in, judged
that nobody had been there since the false Khaujeh Houssain, when he had
fetched the goods for his shop; that the gang of forty robbers was
completely destroyed, and no longer doubted that he was the only person
in the world who had the secret of opening the cave, so that all the
treasure was at his sole disposal. Having brought with him a wallet, he
put into it as much gold as his horse would carry, and returned to town.

Afterward Ali Baba carried his son to the cave, and taught him the
secret, which they handed down to their posterity, who, using their good
fortune with moderation, lived in great honour and splendour.




THE HISTORY OF CODADAD AND HIS BROTHERS


There formerly reigned in the city of Harran a most magnificent and
potent sultan, who loved his subjects, and was equally beloved by them.
He was endued with all virtues, and wanted nothing to complete his
happiness but an heir. He continually prayed to Heaven for a child; and
one night in his sleep, a prophet appeared to him and said: "Your
prayers are heard; you have obtained what you have desired; rise as soon
as you awake, go to your prayers, and make two genuflexions; then walk
into the garden of your palace, call your gardener, and bid him bring
you a pomegranate; eat as many of the seeds as you please, and your
wishes shall be accomplished."

The sultan calling to mind his dream when he awoke, returned thanks to
Heaven, got up, prayed, made two genuflexions, and then went into his
garden, where he took fifty pomegranate seeds, which he counted, and
ate. Some time afterward forty-nine of his wives presented him with
sons, each one as vigorous as a young palm-tree, but Pirouzè, the
fiftieth wife, remained childless. The sultan, therefore, took an
aversion to this lady and would have had her put to death had not his
vizier prevented him, advising rather that she be sent to Samaria, to
her brother, Sultan Samer, with orders that she be well treated.

Not long after Pirouzè had been retired to her brother's country, a most
beautiful prince was born to her. The prince of Samaria wrote
immediately to the sultan of Harran, to acquaint him with the birth of a
son, and to congratulate him on the occasion. The sultan was much
rejoiced at this intelligence, and answered Prince Samer as follows:
"Cousin, all my other wives have each presented me with a prince. I
desire you to educate the child of Pirouzè, to give him the name of
Codadad, and to send him to me when I may apply for him."

The prince of Samaria spared nothing that might improve the education of
his nephew. He taught him to ride, draw the bow, and all other
accomplishments becoming the son of a sovereign; so that Codadad, at
eighteen years of age, was looked upon as a prodigy. The young prince,
being inspired with a courage worthy his birth, said one day to his
mother: "Madam, I begin to grow weary of Samaria; I feel a passion for
glory; give me leave to seek it amidst the perils of war. My father the
sultan of Harran has many enemies. Why does he not call me to his
assistance? Must I spend my life in sloth, when all my brothers have the
happiness to be fighting by his side?" "My son," answered Pirouzè, "I am
no less impatient to have your name become famous; I could wish you had
already signalised yourself against your father's enemies; but we must
wait till he requires it." "No, madam," replied Codadad, "I have already
waited too long. I burn to see the sultan, and am tempted to offer him
my service, as a young stranger: no doubt but he will accept of it, and
I will not discover myself till I have performed some glorious actions."
Pirouzè approved of his generous resolutions, and Codadad departed from
Samaria, as if he had been going to the chase, without acquainting
Prince Samer, lest he should thwart his design.

He was mounted on a white charger, who had a bit and shoes of gold, his
housing was of blue satin embroidered with pearls; the hilt of his
cimeter was of one single diamond, and the scabbard of sandalwood,
adorned with emeralds and rubies, and on his shoulder he carried his bow
and quiver. In this equipage, which greatly set off his handsome
person, he arrived at the city of Harran, and soon found means to offer
his service to the sultan; who being charmed with his beauty, and
perhaps indeed by natural sympathy, gave him a favourable reception, and
asked his name and quality. "Sir," answered Codadad, "I am son to an
emir of Grand Cairo; an inclination to travel has made me quit my
country, and understanding that you were engaged in war, I am come to
your court to offer your majesty my service." The sultan, upon hearing
this, shewed him extraordinary kindness, and gave him a command in his
army.

The young prince soon gained the esteem of the officers, and was admired
by the soldiers. Having no less wit than courage, he so far advanced
himself in the sultan's esteem, as to become his favourite. All the
ministers and other courtiers daily resorted to Codadad, and were so
eager to purchase his friendship, that they neglected the sultan's sons.
The princes could not but resent this conduct, and all conceived an
implacable hatred against him; but the sultan's affection daily
increasing, he was never weary of giving him fresh testimonies of his
regard. He always would have him near his person; and to shew his high
opinion of his wisdom and prudence, committed to his care the other
princes, though he was of the same age as they; so that Codadad was made
governor of his brothers.

This only served to heighten their hatred. "Is it come to this," said
they, "that the sultan, not satisfied with loving a stranger more than
us, will have him to be our governor, and not allow us to act without
his leave? This is not to be endured. We must rid ourselves of this
foreigner." "Let us go together," said one of them, "and despatch him."
"No, no," answered another; "we had better be cautious how we sacrifice
ourselves. His death would render us odious to the sultan. Let us
destroy him by some stratagem. We will ask his permission to hunt, and,
when at a distance from the palace, proceed to some other city and stay
there some time. The sultan will wonder at our absence, and perceiving
we do not return, perhaps put the stranger to death, or at least will
banish him from court, for suffering us to leave the palace."

All the princes applauded this artifice. They went together to Codadad,
and desired him to allow them to take the diversion of hunting,
promising to return the same day. Pirouzè's son was taken in the snare,
and granted the permission his brothers desired. They set out, but never
returned. They had been three days absent, when the sultan asked Codadad
where the princes were, for it was long since he had seen them. "Sir,"
answered Codadad, after making a profound reverence, "they have been
hunting these three days, but they promised me they would return
sooner." The sultan grew uneasy, and his uneasiness increased when he
perceived the princes did not return the next day. He could not check
his anger: "Indiscreet stranger," said he to Codadad, "why did you let
my sons go without bearing them company? Go, seek them immediately, and
bring them to me, or your life shall be forfeited."

These words chilled with alarm Pirouzè's unfortunate son. He armed
himself, departed from the city, and like a shepherd who had lost his
flock, searched the country for his brothers, inquiring at every village
whether they had been seen; but hearing no news of them, abandoned
himself to the most lively grief. He was inconsolable for having given
the princes permission to hunt, or for not having borne them company.

After some days spent in fruitless search, he came to a plain of
prodigious extent, in the midst whereof was a palace built of black
marble. He drew near, and at one of the windows beheld a most beautiful
lady; but set off with no other ornament than her own charms; for her
hair was dishevelled, her garments torn, and on her countenance appeared
all the marks of affliction. As soon as she saw Codadad, and judged he
might hear her, she directed her discourse to him, saying: "Young man,
depart from this fatal place, or you will soon fall into the hands of
the monster that inhabits it: a black, who feeds only on human blood,
resides in this palace; he seizes all persons whom their ill fate
conducts to this plain, and shuts them up in his dungeons, whence they
are never released, but to be devoured by him."

"Madam," answered Codadad, "tell me who you are, and be not concerned
for myself." "I am a lady of quality of Grand Cairo," replied the
captive; "I was passing by this castle yesterday, on my way to Bagdad,
and met with the black, who killed all my attendants, and brought me
hither. I beg of you," she cried, "to make your escape: the black will
soon return; he is gone out to pursue some travellers he espied at a
distance on the plain. Lose no time, but fly."

She had scarcely done speaking before the black appeared. He was of
monstrous bulk, and of a dreadful aspect, mounted on a large Tartar
horse, and bore a heavy cimeter, that none but himself could wield. The
prince seeing him, was amazed at his gigantic stature, directed his
prayers to Heaven to assist him, then drew his own cimeter, and firmly
awaited his approach. The monster, despising so inconsiderable an enemy,
called to him to submit without fighting. Codadad by his conduct shewed
that he was resolved to defend his life; for rushing upon the black, he
wounded him on the knee. The monster, feeling himself wounded, uttered
such a dreadful yell as made all the plain resound. He grew furious and
foamed with rage, and raising himself on his stirrups, made at Codadad
with his dreadful cimeter. The blow was so violent, that it would have
put an end to the young prince, had not he avoided it by a sudden
spring. The cimeter made a horrible hissing in the air: but, before the
black could have time to make a second blow, Codadad struck him on his
right arm with such force that he cut it off. The dreadful cimeter fell
with the hand that held it, and the black, yielding under the violence
of the stroke, lost his stirrups, and made the earth shake with the
weight of his fall. The prince alighted at the same time, and cut off
his enemy's head. Just then the lady, who had been a spectator of the
combat, and was still offering up her earnest prayers to Heaven for the
young hero, uttered a shriek of joy, and said to Codadad: "Prince and
Deliverer, finish the work you have begun; the black has the keys of
this castle, take them and deliver me out of prison."

The prince searched the wretch as he lay stretched on the ground, and
found several keys. He opened the first door, and entered a court, where
he saw the lady coming to meet him; she would have cast herself at his
feet, the better to express her gratitude, but he would not permit her.
She commended his valour, and extolled him above all the heroes in the
world. He returned her compliments; and she appeared still more lovely
to him near, than she had done at a distance. I know not whether she
felt more joy at being delivered from the desperate danger she had been
in, than he for having done so considerable a service to so beautiful a
person.

Their conversation was interrupted by dismal cries and groans. "What do
I hear?" said Codadad; "whence come these miserable lamentations, which
pierce my ears?" "My lord," said the lady, pointing to a little door in
the court, "they come from thence. There are I know not how many
wretched persons whom fate has thrown into the hands of the black. They
are all chained, and the monster drew out one every day to devour."

"It is an addition to my joy," answered the young prince, "to understand
that my victory will save the lives of those unfortunate beings. Come
with me, madam, to partake in the satisfaction of giving them their
liberty." Having so said, they advanced toward the door of the dungeon,
where Codadad, pitying them, and impatient to put an end to their
sufferings, presently put one of the keys into the lock. The noise made
all the unfortunate captives, who concluded it was the black coming,
according to custom, to seize one of them to devour, redouble their
cries and groans.

In the meantime, the prince had opened the door; he went down a steep
staircase into a deep vault, which received some feeble light from a
little window, and in which there were above a hundred persons, bound to
stakes. "Unfortunate travellers," said he to them, "who only expected
the moment of an approaching death, give thanks to Heaven which has this
day delivered you by my means. I have slain the black by whom you were
to be devoured, and am come to knock off your chains." The prisoners
hearing these words, gave a shout of mingled joy and surprise. Codadad
and the lady began to unbind them; and as soon as any of them were
loose, they helped to take off the fetters from the rest; so that in a
short time they were all at liberty.

They then kneeled down, and having returned thanks to Codadad for what
he had done for them, went out of the dungeon; but when they were come
into the court, how was the prince surprised to see among the prisoners
those he was in search of, and almost without hopes to find! "Princes,"
cried he, "is it you whom I behold? May I flatter myself that it is in
my power to restore you to the sultan your father, who is inconsolable
for the loss of you? Are you all here alive? Alas! the death of one of
you will suffice to damp the joy I feel for having delivered you."

The forty-nine princes all made themselves known to Codadad, who
embraced them one after another, and told them how uneasy their father
was on account of their absence. They gave their deliverer all the
commendations he deserved, as did the other prisoners, who could not
find words expressive enough to declare their gratitude. Codadad, with
them, searched the whole castle, where was immense wealth: curious
silks, gold brocades, Persian carpets, China satins, and an infinite
quantity of other goods, which the black had taken from the caravans he
had plundered, a considerable part whereof belonged to the prisoners
Codadad had then liberated. Every man knew and claimed his property. The
prince restored them their own, and divided the rest of the merchandise
among them. Then he said to them: "How will you carry away your goods?
We are here in a desert place, and there is no likelihood of your
getting horses." "My lord," answered one of the prisoners, "the black
robbed us of our camels, as well as of our goods, and perhaps they may
be in the stables of this castle." "That is not unlikely," replied
Codadad; "let us examine." Accordingly they went to the stables, where
they not only found the camels, but also the horses belonging to the
sultan of Harran's sons. All the merchants, overjoyed that they had
recovered their goods and camels, together with their liberty, thought
of nothing but prosecuting their journey; but first repeated their
thanks to their deliverer.

When they were gone, Codadad, directing his discourse to the lady, said:
"What place, madam, do you desire to go to? I intend to bear you company
to the spot you shall choose for your retreat, and I question not but
that all these princes will do the same." The sultan of Harran's sons
protested to the lady, that they would not leave her till she was
restored to her friends.

