
These words put the grand vizier into extreme agitation. The sultan had
some time before signified to him his intention of bestowing the
princess on a son of his; therefore he was afraid, and not without
grounds, that the present might change his majesty's mind. Therefore
going to him, and whispering him in the ear, he said: "I cannot but own
that the present is worthy of the princess; but I beg of your majesty to
grant me three months before you come to a final resolution. I hope,
before that time, my son, on whom you have had the goodness to look with
a favourable eye, will be able to make a nobler present than Aladdin,
who is an entire stranger to your majesty."

The sultan, though he was fully persuaded that it was not possible for
the vizier to provide so considerable a present for his son, yet
hearkened to him, and granted his request. Turning therefore to the old
widow, he said to her: "Good woman, go home, and tell your son that I
agree to the proposal you have made me; but I cannot marry the princess,
my daughter, till the paraphernalia I design for her be got ready, which
cannot be finished these three months; but at the expiration of that
time, come again."

The widow returned home much more gratified than she had expected, since
she had met with a favourable answer.

Aladdin thought himself the most happy of all men at hearing this news,
and thanked his mother for the pains she had taken in the affair, the
good success of which was of so great importance to his peace.

When two of the three months were passed, his mother one evening going
to light the lamp, and finding no oil in the house, went out to buy
some, and when she came into the city, found a general rejoicing. The
shops were open, dressed with foliage, silks, and carpeting, every one
striving to shew their zeal in the most distinguished manner according
to their ability. The streets were crowded with officers in habits of
ceremony, mounted on horses richly caparisoned, each attended by a great
many footmen. Aladdin's mother asked the oil-merchant what was the
meaning of all this preparation of public festivity? "Whence come you,
good woman," said he, "that you do not know that the grand vizier's son
is to marry the Princess Badroulboudour, the sultan's daughter,
to-night? She will presently return from the baths; and these officers
whom you see are to assist at the cavalcade to the palace, where the
ceremony is to be solemnised."

This was news enough for Aladdin's mother. She ran till she was quite
out of breath home to her son, who little suspected any such event.
"Child," cried she, "you are undone! you depend upon the sultan's fine
promises, but they will come to nothing." Aladdin was alarmed at these
words. "Mother," replied he, "how do you know the sultan has been guilty
of a breach of promise?" "This night," answered the mother, "the grand
vizier's son is to marry the Princess Badroulboudour." She then related
how she had heard it; so that he had no reason to doubt the truth of
what she said.

At this account, Aladdin was thunderstruck. Any other man would have
sunk under the shock; but a sudden hope of disappointing his rival soon
roused his spirits, and he bethought himself of the lamp, which had in
every emergency been so useful to him; and without venting his rage in
empty words against the sultan, the vizier, or his son, he only said:
"Perhaps, mother, the vizier's son may not be so happy to-night as he
promises himself: while I go into my chamber a moment, do you get
supper ready." She accordingly went about it, but guessed that her son
was going to make use of the lamp, to prevent, if possible, the
consummation of the marriage.

When Aladdin had got into his chamber, he took the lamp, rubbed it in
the same place as before, when immediately the genie appeared, and said
to him: "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave,
and the slave of all those who have that lamp in their possession; I and
the other slaves of the lamp." "Hear me," said Aladdin; "thou hast
hitherto brought me whatever I wanted as to provisions; but now I have
business of the greatest importance for thee to execute. I have demanded
the Princess Badroulboudour in marriage of the sultan, her father; he
promised her to me, only requiring three months' delay; but instead of
keeping that promise, has this night planned to marry her to the grand
vizier's son. What I ask of you is, that as soon as the two are made
one, you bring them both hither to me." "Master," replied the genie, "I
will obey you. Have you any other commands?" "None at present," answered
Aladdin, and then the genie disappeared.

Aladdin having left his chamber, supped with his mother, with the same
tranquillity of mind as usual; and after supper talked of the princess's
marriage as of an affair wherein he had not the least concern; he then
retired to his own chamber again, but sat up waiting the execution of
his orders to the genie.

In the meantime, everything was prepared with the greatest magnificence
in the sultan's palace to celebrate the princess's nuptials; and the
evening was spent with all the usual ceremonies and great rejoicings.

No sooner had the bride and bridegroom slipped away from the company,
however, than the genie, as the faithful slave of the lamp, and punctual
in executing the command of those who possessed it, to the great
amazement of them both, took them up and transported them in an instant
to Aladdin's chamber, where he set them down.

Aladdin had waited impatiently for this moment. "Take this new-married
man," said he to the genie, "shut him up in the house of office, and
come again to-morrow morning before daybreak." The genie instantly
carried the vizier's son whither Aladdin had commanded him; and after he
had breathed upon him, which prevented his stirring, left him there.

Passionate as was Aladdin's love for the princess, he did not talk much
to her when they were alone; but only said with a respectful air: "Fear
nothing, adorable princess; you are here in safety. If I have been
forced to come to this extremity, it is to prevent an unjust rival's
possessing you, contrary to your father's promise in favour of myself."

The princess, who knew nothing of these particulars, gave very little
attention to what Aladdin could say. The fright and amazement of so
surprising an adventure had alarmed her so much that he could not get
one word from her. Badroulboudour never passed a night so ill in her
life; and if we consider the condition in which the genie left the grand
vizier's son, we may imagine that the new bridegroom spent it much
worse.

Aladdin had no occasion the next morning to rub the lamp to call the
genie; who appeared at the hour appointed, and said to him: "I am here,
master; what are your commands?" "Go," said Aladdin, "fetch the vizier's
son out of the place where you left him, and carry the pair to the
sultan's palace, from whence you brought them." The genie presently
returned with the vizier's son, and in an instant they were transported
into the same chamber of the palace from whence they had been brought.
But we must observe, that all this time the genie never was visible
either to the princess or the grand vizier's son. His hideous form would
have made them die with fear. Neither did they hear anything of the
discourse between Aladdin and him; they only perceived the motion
through the air, and their transportation from one place to another;
which we may well imagine was enough to alarm them.

The sultan went to the room of the princess next morning and kissed her
between the eyes, according to custom, wishing her a good morrow, but
was extremely surprised to see her so melancholy. She only cast at him a
sorrowful look, expressive of great affliction. He said a few words to
her; but finding that he could not get an answer, was forced to retire.
Nevertheless, he suspected that there was something extraordinary in
this silence, and thereupon went immediately to the sultaness's
apartment, told her in what a state he had found the princess, and how
she had received him. "Sir," said the sultaness, "I will go and see her;
I am much deceived if she receives me in the same manner."

As soon as the sultaness was dressed, she went to the princess's
apartment, who was still in bed. She undrew the curtain, wished her good
morrow, and kissed her. But how great was her surprise when she returned
no answer; and looking more attentively at her, she perceived her to be
much dejected, which made her judge that something had happened, which
she did not understand. "How comes it, child," said the sultaness, "that
you do not return my caresses? Ought you to treat your mother after this
manner? I am induced to believe something extraordinary has happened;
come, tell me freely, and leave me no longer in a painful suspense."

At last the princess broke silence with a deep sigh, and said: "Alas!
most honoured mother, forgive me if I have failed in the respect I owe
you. My mind is so full of the extraordinary circumstances which have
befallen me that I have not yet recovered from my amazement and alarm."
She then related her surprising adventures, which the sultaness heard
very patiently, but could scarcely believe. "You did well, child," said
she, "not to speak of this to your father: take care not to mention it
to anybody; for you will certainly be thought mad if you talk in this
manner." "Madam," replied the princess, "I can assure you I am in my
right senses; ask my husband and he will tell you the same
circumstances." "I will," said the sultaness; "but if he should talk in
the same manner, I shall not be better persuaded of the truth. Come,
rise, and throw off this idle fancy; it will be strange if all the
feasts and rejoicings in the kingdom should be interrupted by such a
vision. Do not you hear the trumpets of congratulation, and concerts of
the finest music? Cannot these inspire you with joy and make you forget
the fancies of a dream?" At the same time the sultaness called the
princess's women, and after she had seen her get up, went to the
sultan's apartment, told him that her daughter had got some odd notions
in her head, but that there was nothing in them but idle phantasy.

She then sent for the vizier's son, to know of him something of what the
princess had told her; but he, thinking himself highly honoured to be
allied to the sultan, and not willing to lose the princess, denied what
had happened. "That is enough," answered the sultaness; "I ask no more.
I see you are wiser than my daughter."

The rejoicings lasted all that day in the palace, and the sultaness, who
never left the princess, forgot nothing to divert her, and induce her to
take part in the various diversions and shows; but she was so struck
with the idea of what had happened to her in the night, that it was easy
to see her thoughts were entirely taken up with it. Neither was the
grand vizier's son in less tribulation, though his ambition made him
disguise his feelings so well, that nobody doubted of his being a happy
bridegroom.

Aladdin, who was well acquainted with what passed in the palace, was
resolved that the troublesome adventure of the night before should again
disturb the unhappy pair, and therefore had recourse to his lamp, and
when the genie appeared and offered his service, he said to him: "Bring
the grand vizier's son and the Princess Badroulboudour hither to-night,
as thou didst yesterday."

The genie obeyed as faithfully and exactly as the day before; the grand
vizier's son passed the night as coldly and disagreeably, and the
princess had the same alarm and mortification. The genie, according to
orders, came the next morning, and returned the new-married couple again
to the palace.

The sultan, after the reception the princess had given him, was very
anxious to know how she had passed the second night, and therefore went
into her chamber as early as the morning before. After the same caresses
he had given her the former morning, he bade her good-morrow. "Well,
daughter," said he, "are you in a better humour than yesterday?" Still
the princess was silent, and the sultan, perceiving her to be in greater
confusion than before, doubted not that something very extraordinary was
the cause; but provoked that his daughter should conceal it, he said to
her in a rage, with his sabre in his hand: "Daughter, tell me what is
the matter, or I will cut off your head immediately."

The princess, more frightened at the tone of the enraged sultan than at
the sight of the drawn sabre, at last broke silence, and said with tears
in her eyes: "My dear father and sultan, I ask your majesty's pardon if
I have offended you, and hope that out of your goodness you will have
compassion on me."

After this preamble, which appeased the sultan, she told him what had
happened to her in so moving a manner, that he, who loved her tenderly,
was most sensibly grieved. She added: "If your majesty doubts the truth
of this account, you may inform yourself from my husband, who will tell
you the same thing."

The sultan immediately felt all the uneasiness so surprising an
adventure must have given the princess. "Daughter," said he, "you are
much to blame for not telling me this yesterday, since it concerns me as
much as yourself. I did not marry you to make you miserable, but that
you might enjoy all the happiness you might hope for from a husband, who
to me seemed agreeable to you. Efface all these troublesome ideas from
your memory; I will take care that you shall have no more such
disagreeable experiences."

As soon as the sultan had returned to his own apartment, he sent for the
grand vizier: "Vizier," said he, "have you seen your son, and has he
told you anything?" The vizier replied: "No." The sultan related all the
circumstances of which the princess had informed him, and afterward
said: "I do not doubt but that my daughter has told me the truth; but
nevertheless I should be glad to have it confirmed by your son,
therefore go and ask him how it was."

The grand vizier went immediately to his son, communicated what the
sultan had told him, and enjoined him to conceal nothing, but to relate
the whole truth. "I will disguise nothing from you, father," replied the
son, "for indeed all that the princess has stated is true. Yet I must
tell you, that all these experiences do not in the least lessen those
sentiments of love and gratitude I entertain for her; but I must
confess, that notwithstanding all the honour that attends marrying my
sovereign's daughter, I would much rather die than continue in so
exalted an alliance, if I must undergo much longer what I have already
endured. I do not doubt but that the princess entertains the same
sentiments, and that she will readily agree to a separation which is so
necessary both for her repose and mine. Therefore, father, I beg, by the
same tenderness which led you to procure me so great an honour, to
obtain the sultan's consent that our marriage may be declared null and
void."

Notwithstanding the grand vizier's ambition to have his son allied to
the sultan, the firm resolution he saw he had formed to be separated
from the princess caused the father to give his majesty a full account
of what had passed, begging him finally to give his son leave to retire
from the palace, alleging it was not just that the princess should be a
moment longer exposed to so terrible a persecution upon his son's
account.

The grand vizier found no great difficulty to obtain what he asked, as
the sultan had determined upon it already; orders were given to put a
stop to all rejoicings in the palace and town, and expresses despatched
to all parts of his dominions to countermand his first orders; and in a
short time, all merry-making ceased.

This sudden change gave rise both in the city and kingdom to various
speculations and inquiries; but no other account could be given of it,
except that both the vizier and his son went out of the palace much
dejected. Nobody but Aladdin knew the secret, who rejoiced at the happy
success procured by his lamp. Neither the sultan nor the grand vizier,
who had forgotten Aladdin and his request, had the least thought that he
had any concern in the enchantment which caused the dissolution of the
marriage.

Aladdin waited till the three months were completed, which the sultan
had appointed for the consummation of the marriage between the Princess
Badroulboudour and himself; and the next day sent his mother to the
palace, to remind the sultan of his promise.

The widow went to the palace, and stood in the same place as before in
the hall of audience. The sultan no sooner cast his eyes upon her than
he knew her again, remembered her business, and how long he had put her
off: therefore, when the grand vizier was beginning to make his report,
the sultan interrupted him, and said: "Vizier, I see the good woman who
made me the present of jewels some months ago; forbear your report, till
I have heard what she has to say." The vizier, looking about the divan,
perceived the tailor's widow, and sent the chief of the mace-bearers to
conduct her to the sultan.

Aladdin's mother came to the foot of the throne, prostrated herself as
usual, and when she rose, the sultan asked her what she would have.
"Sir," said she, "I come to represent to your majesty, in the name of my
son, Aladdin, that the three months, at the end of which you ordered me
to come again, are expired; and to beg you to remember your promise."

The sultan, when he had fixed a time to answer the request of this good
woman, little thought of hearing any more of a marriage, which he
imagined would be very disagreeable to the princess; so this summons for
him to fulfil his promise was somewhat embarrassing; he declined giving
an answer till he had consulted his vizier, and signified to him the
little inclination he had to conclude a match for his daughter with a
stranger, whose rank he supposed to be very mean.

The grand vizier freely told the sultan his thoughts, and said to him:
"In my opinion, sir, there is an infallible way for your majesty to
avoid a match so disproportionate, without giving Aladdin, were he known
to your majesty, any cause of complaint; which is, to set so high a
price upon the princess that, however rich he may be, he cannot comply
with it. This is the only way to make him desist from so bold an
undertaking."

The sultan, approving of the grand vizier's advice, turned to the
tailor's widow and said to her: "Good woman, it is true sultans ought to
abide by their words, and I am ready to keep mine, by making your son
happy in marriage with the princess, my daughter. But as I cannot marry
her without some further valuable consideration from your son, you may
tell him, I will fulfil my promise as soon as he shall send me forty
trays of massy gold, full of the same sort of jewels you have already
made me a present of, and carried by the like number of black slaves,
who shall be led by as many young and handsome white slaves, all dressed
magnificently. On these conditions I am ready to bestow the princess, my
daughter, upon him; therefore, good woman, go and tell him so, and I
will wait till you bring me his answer."

Aladdin's mother prostrated herself a second time before the sultan's
throne, and retired. On her way home, she laughed within herself at her
son's foolish imagination. "Where," said she, "can he get so many large
gold trays, and such precious stones to fill them? Must he go again to
that subterranean abode and gather them off the trees? and where will he
get so many such slaves as the sultan requires? It is altogether out of
his power, and I believe he will not be much pleased with my embassy
this time." When she came home, full of these thoughts, she said to her
son: "Indeed, child, I would not have you think any farther of your
marriage with the princess. The sultan received me very kindly, and I
believe he was well inclined to you; but if I am not much deceived the
grand vizier has made him change his mind." She then gave her son an
exact account of what the sultan had said to her, and the conditions on
which he consented to the match. Afterward she said to him: "The sultan
expects your answer immediately; but," continued she, laughing, "I
believe he may wait long enough."

"Not so long, mother, as you imagine," replied Aladdin; "the sultan is
mistaken, if he thinks by this exorbitant demand to prevent my
entertaining thoughts of the princess. I expected that he would have set
a higher price upon her incomparable charms. His demand is but a trifle
to what I could have done for her. But while I think of satisfying his
request, go and get something for our dinner, and leave the rest to me."

As soon as his mother was gone out, Aladdin took the lamp, and rubbing
it, the genie appeared, and offered his service as usual. "The sultan,"
said Aladdin to him, "gives me the princess his daughter in marriage;
but demands first, forty large trays of massy gold, full of the fruits
of the garden from whence I took this lamp; and these he expects to have
carried by as many black slaves, each preceded by a young handsome white
slave, richly clothed. Go, and fetch me this present as soon as
possible, that I may send it to him before the divan breaks up." The
genie told him his command should be immediately obeyed, and
disappeared.

In a little time afterward the genie returned with forty black slaves,
each bearing on his head a heavy tray of pure gold, full of pearls,
diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and every sort of precious stones, all
larger and more beautiful than those formerly presented to the sultan.
Each tray was covered with silver tissue, embroidered with flowers of
gold: these, together with the white slaves, quite filled the house,
which was but a small one, the little court before it, and a small
garden behind. The genie asked if he had any other commands, and Aladdin
telling him that he wanted nothing further, he disappeared.

When Aladdin's mother came from market, she was much surprised to see so
many people and such vast riches. As soon as she had laid down her
provisions, she was going to pull off her veil; but her son prevented
her, and said: "Mother, let us lose no time; before the sultan and the
divan rise, I would have you return to the palace with this present as
the dowry demanded for the princess, that he may judge by my diligence
of the ardent desire I have to procure myself the honour of this
alliance." Without waiting for his mother's reply, Aladdin opened the
street-door, and made the slaves walk out; each white slave followed by
a black with a tray upon his head. When they were all out, the mother
followed the last black slave; he shut the door, and then retired to his
chamber, full of hopes that the sultan, after this present, which was
such as he required, would receive him as his son-in-law.

The first white slave who went out made all the people who were going by
stop; and before they were all clear of the house, the streets were
crowded with spectators, who ran to see so extraordinary and magnificent
a procession. The dress of each slave was so rich, both for the stuff
and the jewels, that those who were dealers in them valued each at no
less than a million of money; besides, the neatness and propriety of the
dress, the noble air, fine shape and proportion of each slave were
unparalleled; their grave walk at an equal distance from each other, the
lustre of the jewels, curiously set in their girdles of gold, and the
egrets of precious stones in their turbans, put the spectators into such
great admiration, that they could not avoid following them with their
eyes as far as possible. As soon as the first of these slaves arrived at
the palace gate, the porters formed themselves into order, taking him
for a prince from the magnificence of his habit, and were going to kiss
the hem of his garment; but the slave, who was instructed by the genie,
prevented them, and said: "We are only slaves, our master will appear at
a proper time."

The first slave, followed by the rest, advanced into the second court,
which was very spacious, and in which the sultan's household was ranged
during the sitting of the divan. The magnificence of the officers, who
stood at the head of their troops, was considerably eclipsed by the
slaves who bore Aladdin's present, of which they themselves made a part.

As the sultan, who had been informed of their approach to the palace,
had given orders for them to be admitted, they went into the divan in
regular order, one part filing to the right, and the other to the left.
After they were all entered, and had formed a semicircle before the
sultan's throne, the black slaves laid the golden trays on the carpet,
prostrating themselves, and at the same time the white slaves did the
same. When they rose, the black slaves uncovered the trays, and then all
stood with their arms crossed over their breasts.

In the meantime Aladdin's mother advanced to the foot of the throne, and
having paid her respects, said to the sultan: "Sir, my son is sensible
that this present, which he has sent your majesty, is much below the
Princess Badroulboudour's worth; but hopes, nevertheless, that your
majesty will accept of it."

The sultan was not able to give the least attention to this compliment.
The moment he cast his eyes on the forty trays, full of the most
precious and beautiful jewels he had ever seen, and the fourscore
slaves, who appeared by the elegance of their persons, and the
magnificence of their dress, like so many princes, he was overwhelmed.
Instead of answering the compliment of Aladdin's mother, he addressed
himself to the grand vizier, who could not any more than the sultan
comprehend from whence such a profusion of richness could come. "Well,
vizier," said he aloud, "who do you think it can be that has sent me so
extraordinary a present? Do you think him worthy of the Princess
Badroulboudour, my daughter?"

The vizier, notwithstanding his envy and grief at seeing a stranger
preferred to his son, durst not disguise his sentiments. It was too
visible that Aladdin's present was more than sufficient to merit his
being received into royal alliance; therefore, consulting his master's
feelings, he returned this answer: "I am so far from having any thoughts
that the person who has made your majesty so noble a present is unworthy
of the honour you would do him, that I should say he deserved much more,
if I were not persuaded that the greatest treasure in the world ought
not to be put in competition with the princess, your majesty's
daughter."

The sultan made no longer hesitation, nor thought of informing himself
whether Aladdin was endowed with all the qualifications requisite in one
who aspired to be his son-in-law. The sight alone of such immense
riches, and Aladdin's quickness in satisfying his demand, without
starting the least difficulty at the exorbitant conditions he had
imposed, easily persuaded him that he could want nothing to render him
accomplished, and such as he desired. Therefore, to send Aladdin's
mother back with all the satisfaction she could desire, he said to her:
"My good lady, go and tell your son that I wait with open arms to
embrace him, and the more haste he makes to come and receive the
princess, my daughter, from my hands, the greater pleasure he will do
me."

As soon as the tailor's widow had retired, overjoyed to see her son
raised to such exalted fortune, the sultan put an end to the audience;
and rising from his throne, ordered that the princess's eunuchs should
come and carry the trays into their mistress's apartment, whither he
went himself to examine them with her at his leisure. The fourscore
slaves were conducted into the palace; and the sultan, telling the
princess of their magnificent appearance, ordered them to be brought
before her apartment, that she might see through the lattices that he
had not exaggerated in his account of them.

In the meantime, Aladdin's mother got home, and shewed in her
countenance the good news she brought her son. "My son," said she to
him, "you have now all the reason in the world to be pleased. The
sultan, with the approbation of the whole court, has declared that you
are worthy to possess the Princess Badroulboudour, and waits to embrace
you, and conclude your marriage; therefore, you must think of making
preparations for your interview, which may answer the high opinion he
has formed of your person."

Aladdin, enraptured with this news, made little reply, but retired to
his chamber. There, after he had rubbed the lamp, which had never failed
him, the obedient genie appeared. "Genie," said Aladdin, "I want to
bathe immediately, and you must afterward provide me the richest and
most magnificent habit ever worn by a monarch." No sooner were the words
out of his mouth than the genie rendered him invisible, and transported
him into a bath of the finest marble, where he was undressed, without
seeing by whom, in a magnificent and spacious hall. From the hall he was
led to the bath, which was of a moderate heat, and he was there rubbed
with various scented waters. After he had passed through several degrees
of heat, he came out quite a different man from what he was before. His
skin was clear white and red, his body lightsome and free; and when he
returned into the hall, he found, instead of his own, a suit the
magnificence of which astonished him. The genie helped him to dress, and
when he had done, transported him back to his own chamber, where he
asked him if he had any other commands? "Yes," answered Aladdin, "I
expect you to bring me as soon as possible a charger that surpasses in
beauty and goodness the best in the sultan's stables, with a saddle,
bridle, and other caparisons worth a million of money. I want also
twenty slaves, as richly clothed as those who carried the present to the
sultan, to walk by my side, and twenty more to go before me in two
ranks. Besides these, bring my mother six women slaves to attend her, as
richly dressed at least as any of the Princess Badroulboudour's, each
carrying a complete dress fit for any sultaness. I want also ten
thousand pieces of gold in ten purses; go, and make haste."

As soon as Aladdin had given these orders, the genie disappeared, but
presently returned with the horse, the forty slaves, ten of whom carried
each a purse containing ten thousand pieces of gold, and six women
slaves, each carrying on her head a different dress for Aladdin's
mother, wrapped up in a piece of silver tissue.

Of the ten purses Aladdin took four, which he gave to his mother,
telling her, those were to supply her with necessaries; the other six he
left in the hands of the slaves who brought them, with an order to throw
them by handfuls among the people as they went to the sultan's palace.
The six slaves who carried the purses he ordered likewise to march
before him, three on the right hand and three on the left. Afterward he
presented the six women slaves to his mother, telling her that they were
her slaves, and that the dresses they had brought were for her use.

When Aladdin had thus settled matters, he told the genie he would call
for him when he wanted him, and thereupon the genie disappeared.
Aladdin's thoughts now were only upon answering, as soon as possible,
the desire the sultan had shewn to see him. He despatched one of the
forty slaves to the palace, with an order to address himself to the
chief of the porters, to know when he might have the honour to come and
throw himself at the sultan's feet. The slave soon acquitted himself of
his commission, and brought for answer that the sultan waited for him
with impatience.

Aladdin immediately mounted his charger, and though he never was on
horseback before, appeared with such extraordinary grace, that the most
experienced horseman would not have taken him for a novice. The streets
through which he was to pass were almost instantly filled with an
innumerable concourse of people, who made the air echo with their
acclamations, especially every time the six slaves who carried the
purses threw handfuls of gold among the populace. Neither did these
shouts of joy come from those alone who scrambled for the money, but
from a superior rank of people, who could not forbear applauding
Aladdin's generosity. Not only those who knew him when he played in the
streets like a vagabond did not recollect him, but those who saw him but
a little while before hardly recognised him, so much were his features
altered: such were the effects of the lamp, as to procure by degrees to
those who possessed it perfections suitable to the rank to which the
right use of it advanced them. Much more attention was paid to Aladdin's
person than to the pomp and magnificence of his attendants, as a similar
show had been seen the day before, when the slaves walked in procession
with the present to the sultan. Nevertheless, the horse was much admired
by good judges, who knew how to discern his beauties, without being
dazzled by the jewels and richness of his furniture. When the report was
everywhere spread that the sultan was going to give the princess in
marriage to Aladdin, nobody regarded his birth, nor envied his good
fortune, so worthy he seemed of it in the public opinion.

When he arrived at the palace, everything was prepared for his
reception; and when he came to the gate of the second court, he would
have alighted from his horse, agreeably to the custom observed by the
grand vizier, the commander-in-chief of the empire, and governors of
provinces of the first rank; but the chief of the mace-bearers, who
waited on him by the sultan's order, prevented him, and attended him to
the grand hall of audience, where he helped him to dismount. The
officers formed themselves into two ranks at the entrance of the hall.
The chief put Aladdin on his right hand, and through the midst of them
led him to the sultan's throne.

As soon as the sultan perceived Aladdin, he was no less surprised to see
him more richly and magnificently habited than ever he had been himself,
than struck at his good mien, fine shape, and a certain air of
unexpected dignity, very different from the meanness of his mother's
late appearance.

But, notwithstanding, his amazement and surprise did not hinder him from
rising off his throne, and descending two or three steps, quickly enough
to prevent Aladdin's throwing himself at his feet. He embraced him with
all possible demonstrations of joy at his arrival. After this civility
Aladdin would have thrown himself at his feet again; but he held him
fast by the hand, and obliged him to sit close to the throne.

Aladdin then addressed the sultan, saying: "I receive the honour which
your majesty out of your great condescension is pleased to confer; but
permit me to assure you that I know the greatness of your power, and
that I am not insensible how much my birth is below the lustre of the
high rank to which I am raised. I ask your majesty's pardon for my
rashness, but I cannot dissemble that I should die with grief were I to
lose my hopes of seeing myself united to the divine princess who is the
object of my wishes."

"My son," answered the sultan, embracing him a second time, "you would
wrong me to doubt for a moment of my sincerity: your life from this
moment is too dear to me not to preserve it, by presenting you with the
remedy which is at my disposal."

After these words, the sultan gave a signal, and immediately the air
echoed with the sound of trumpets, hautboys, and other musical
instruments: and at the same time he led Aladdin into a magnificent
hall, where was laid out a most splendid collation. The sultan and
Aladdin ate by themselves, while the grand vizier and the great lords of
the court, according to their dignity and rank, sat at different tables.
The conversation turned on different subjects; but all the while the
sultan took so much pleasure in looking at his intended son-in-law, that
he hardly ever took his eyes off him; and throughout the whole of their
conversation Aladdin shewed so much good sense, as confirmed the sultan
in the high opinion he had formed of him.

After the feast, the sultan sent for the chief judge of his capital, and
ordered him to draw up immediately a contract of marriage between the
Princess Badroulboudour, his daughter, and Aladdin.

When the judge had drawn up the contract in all the requisite forms, the
sultan asked Aladdin if he would stay in the palace, and solemnise the
ceremonies of marriage that day; to which he answered: "Sir, though
great is my impatience to enjoy your majesty's goodness, yet I beg of
you to give me leave to defer it till I have built a palace fit to
receive the princess; therefore I petition you to grant me a convenient
spot of ground near your abode, that I may the more frequently pay my
respects, and I will take care to have it finished with all diligence."
"Son," said the sultan, "take what ground you think proper, there is
space enough on every quarter round my palace; but consider, I cannot
see you too soon united with my daughter, which alone is wanting to
complete my happiness." After these words he embraced Aladdin again, who
took his leave with as much politeness as if he had been bred up and had
always lived at court.

Aladdin returned home in the order he had come, amidst the acclamations
of the people, who wished him all happiness and prosperity. As soon as
he dismounted, he retired to his own chamber, took the lamp, and called
the genie as before, who in the usual manner made him a tender of his
service. "Genie," said Aladdin, "I have every reason to commend your
exactness in executing hitherto punctually whatever I have demanded; but
now, if you have any regard for the lamp, your protector, you must shew,
if possible, more zeal and diligence than ever. I would have you build
me, as soon as you can, a palace opposite, but at a proper distance
from, the sultan's, fit to receive my spouse, the Princess
Badroulboudour. I leave the choice of the materials to you, that is to
say, porphyry, jasper, agate, lapis lazuli, or the finest marble of
various colours, and also the architecture of the building. But I expect
that on the terraced roof of this palace you will build me a large hall
crowned with a dome, and having four equal fronts; and that instead of
layers of bricks, the walls be formed of massy gold and silver, laid
alternately: that each front shall contain six windows, the lattices of
all of which (except one, which must be left unfinished) shall be so
enriched in the most tasteful workmanship, with diamonds, rubies, and
emeralds, that they shall exceed anything of the kind ever seen in the
world. I would have an inner and outer court in front of the palace, and
a spacious garden; but above all things, take care that there be laid in
a place which you shall point out to me, a treasure of gold and silver
coin. Besides, the edifice must be well provided with kitchens and
offices, storehouses, and rooms to keep choice furniture in, for every
season of the year. I must have stables full of the finest horses, with
their equerries and grooms, and hunting equipage. There must be officers
to attend the kitchens and offices, and women slaves to wait on the
princess. You understand what I mean; therefore go about it, and come
and tell me when all is finished."

By the time Aladdin had instructed the genie respecting the building of
his palace, the sun was set. The next morning, before break of day, our
bridegroom, whose love for the princess would not let him sleep, was up,
when the genie presented himself and said: "Sir, your palace is
finished; come and see how you like it." Aladdin had no sooner signified
his consent, than the genie transported him thither in an instant, and
he found it so much beyond his expectation, that he could not enough
admire it. The genie led him through all the apartments, where he met
with nothing but what was rich and magnificent, with officers and slaves
all habited according to their rank and the services to which they were
appointed. The genie then shewed him the treasury, which was opened by a
treasurer, where Aladdin saw heaps of purses, of different sizes, piled
up to the top of the ceiling, and disposed in most excellent order. The
genie assured him of the treasurer's fidelity, and thence led him to the
stables, where he shewed him some of the finest horses in the world, and
the grooms busy in dressing them; from thence they went to the
storehouses, which were filled with all things necessary, both for food
and ornament.

When Aladdin had examined the palace from top to bottom, and
particularly the hall with the four and twenty windows, and found it
much beyond whatever he could have imagined, he said: "Genie, no one can
be better satisfied than I am; and indeed I should be much to blame if I
found any fault. There is only one thing wanting which I forgot to
mention; that is, to lay from the sultan's palace to the door of the
apartment designed for the princess, a carpet of fine velvet for her to
walk upon." The genie immediately disappeared, and Aladdin saw what he
desired executed in an instant. The genie then returned, and carried him
home before the gates of the sultan's palace were opened.

When the porters, who had always been used to an open prospect, came to
open the gates, they were amazed to find it obstructed, and to see a
carpet of velvet spread from the grand entrance. They did not
immediately look how far it extended, but when they could discern
Aladdin's palace distinctly, their surprise was increased. The news of
so extraordinary a wonder was presently spread through the palace. The
grand vizier, who arrived soon after the gates were open, being no less
amazed than others at this novelty, ran and acquainted the sultan, but
endeavoured to make him believe it to be all enchantment. "Vizier,"
replied the sultan, "why will you have it to be enchantment? You know as
well as I that it must be Aladdin's palace, which I gave him leave to
build, for the reception of my daughter. After the proof we have had of
his riches, can we think it strange that he should raise a palace in so
short a time? He wished to surprise us, and let us see what wonders are
to be done with money in only one night. Confess sincerely that the
enchantment you talk of proceeds from a little envy on account of your
son's disappointment."

When Aladdin had been conveyed home, and had dismissed the genie, he
found his mother up, and dressing herself in one of those suits which
had been brought her. By the time the sultan rose from the council,
Aladdin had prepared his mother to go to the palace with her slaves, and
desired her, if she saw the sultan, to tell him she should do herself
the honour toward evening to attend the princess to her palace.
Accordingly she went; but though she and the women slaves who followed
her were all dressed like sultanesses, yet the crowd was not near so
great as the preceding day, because they were all veiled, and each had
on an upper garment agreeable to the richness and magnificence of their
habits. Aladdin, taking care not to forget his wonderful lamp, mounted
his horse, left his paternal home forever, and went to the palace in the
same pomp as the day before.

As soon as the porters of the sultan's palace saw Aladdin's mother, they
went and informed the sultan, who immediately ordered the bands of
trumpets, cymbals, drums, fifes, and hautboys, placed in different parts
of the palace, to play, so that the air resounded with concerts which
inspired the whole city with joy: the merchants began to adorn their
shops and houses with fine carpets and silks, and to prepare
illuminations against night. The artisans of every description left
their work, and the populace repaired to the great space between the
royal palace and that of Aladdin; which last drew all their attention,
not only because it was new to them, but because there was no comparison
between the two buildings. But their amazement was to comprehend by what
unheard-of miracle so magnificent a palace could have been so soon
erected, it being apparent to all that there were no prepared materials,
or any foundations laid the day before.

Aladdin's mother was received in the palace with honour, and introduced
into the Princess Badroulboudour's apartment by the chief of the
eunuchs. As soon as the princess saw her, she rose, saluted, and desired
her to sit down on a sofa; and while her women finished dressing, and
adorning her with the jewels which Aladdin had presented to her, a
collation was served up. At the same time the sultan, who wished to be
as much with his daughter as possible before he parted with her, came in
and paid the old lady great respect. Aladdin's mother had talked to the
sultan in public, but he had never seen her with her veil off, as she
was then; and though she was somewhat advanced in years, she had the
remains of a good face, which showed what she had been in her youth. The
sultan, who had always seen her dressed very meanly, not to say poorly,
was surprised to find her as richly and magnificently attired as the
princess, his daughter. This made him think Aladdin equally prudent and
wise in whatever he undertook.

When it was night, the princess left her own apartment for Aladdin's
palace, with his mother on her left hand carried in a superb litter,
followed by a hundred women slaves, dressed with surprising
magnificence. All the bands of music, which had played from the time
Aladdin's mother arrived, being joined together, led the procession,
followed by a hundred state ushers, and the like number of black
eunuchs, in two files, with their officers at their head. Four hundred
of the sultan's young pages carried flambeaux on each side, which,
together with the illuminations of the sultan's and Aladdin's palaces,
made it as light as day.

At length the princess arrived at the new palace and Aladdin ran with
all imaginable joy to receive her at the grand entrance. His mother had
taken care to point him out to the princess, in the midst of the
officers who surrounded him, and she was charmed with his person.
"Adorable princess," said Aladdin, accosting her, and saluting her
respectfully, as soon as she had entered her apartment, "if I have the
misfortune to have displeased you by my boldness in aspiring to the
possession of so lovely a creature, I must tell you, that you ought to
blame your bright eyes and charms, not me." "Prince," answered the
princess, "I am obedient to the will of my father; and it is enough for
me to have seen you, to tell you that I obey without reluctance."

Aladdin, charmed with so agreeable an answer, would not keep the
princess standing; but took her by the hand, which he kissed with the
greatest demonstration of joy, and led her into a large hall,
illuminated with an infinite number of wax candles; where, by the care
of the genie, a noble feast was served up. The dishes were of massy
gold, and contained the most delicate viands, and all the other
ornaments and embellishments of the hall were answerable to this
display. The princess, dazzled to see so much riches, said to Aladdin:
"I thought, prince, that nothing in the world was so beautiful as the
sultan my father's palace, but the sight of this hall alone is
sufficient to shew I was deceived."

Then Aladdin led the princess to the place appointed for her, and as
soon as she and his mother were seated, a band of the most harmonious
instruments, accompanied with the voices of beautiful ladies, began a
concert, which lasted without intermission to the end of the repast. The
princess was so charmed, that she declared she had never heard anything
like it in the sultan her father's court; but she knew not that these
musicians were fairies chosen by the genie, the slave of the lamp.

When the supper was ended, there entered a company of female dancers,
who performed, according to the custom of the country, several figure
dances, singing at the same time verses in praise of the bride and
bridegroom. About midnight the happy pair retired to their apartments
and the nuptial ceremonies were at an end.

The next morning, when Aladdin arose, his attendants presented
themselves to dress him, and brought him another habit as magnificent as
that worn the day before. He then ordered one of the horses appointed
for his use to be got ready, mounted him, and went in the midst of a
large troop of slaves to the sultan's palace. The sultan received him
with the same honours as before, embraced him, placed him on the throne
near him, and ordered a collation. Aladdin said: "I beg your majesty
will dispense with my eating with you to-day; I came to entreat you to
take a repast in the princess's palace, attended by your grand vizier,
and all the lords of your court." The sultan consented with pleasure,
rose up immediately, and, preceded by the principal officers of his
palace, and followed by all the great lords of his court, accompanied
Aladdin.

The nearer the sultan approached Aladdin's palace, the more he was
struck with its beauty, but was much more amazed when he entered it; and
could not forbear breaking out into exclamations of approbation. But
when he came into the hall, and cast his eyes on the windows, enriched
with diamonds, rubies, emeralds, all large perfect stones, he was so
much surprised, that he remained some time motionless. After he
recovered himself, he said to his vizier; "Is it possible that there
should be such a stately palace so near my own, and I be an utter
stranger to it till now?" "Sir," replied the grand vizier, "your majesty
may remember that the day before yesterday you gave Aladdin, whom you
accepted for a son-in-law, leave to build a palace opposite your own,
and that very day at sunset there was no palace on this spot, but
yesterday I had the honour first to tell you that the palace was built
and finished." "I remember," replied the sultan, "but never imagined
that the palace was one of the wonders of the world; for where in all
the world besides shall we find walls built of massy gold and silver,
instead of brick, stone, or marble; and diamonds, rubies, and emeralds
composing the windows!"

The sultan would examine and admire the beauty of all the windows, and
counting them, found that there were but three and twenty so richly
adorned, and he was greatly astonished that the twenty-fourth was left
imperfect. "Vizier," said he, for that minister made a point of never
leaving him, "I am surprised that a hall of this magnificence should be
left thus imperfect." "Sir," replied the grand vizier, "without doubt
Aladdin only wanted time to finish this window like the rest; for it is
not to be supposed but that he has sufficient jewels for the purpose, or
that he will not complete it at the first opportunity."

Aladdin, who had left the sultan to go and give some orders, returned
just as the vizier had finished his remark. "Son," said the sultan to
him, "this hall is the most worthy of admiration of any in the world;
there is only one thing that surprises me, which is, to find one of the
windows unfinished. Is it from the forgetfulness or negligence of the
workmen, or want of time, that they have not put the finishing stroke to
so beautiful a piece of architecture?" "Sir," answered Aladdin, "it was
for none of these reasons that your majesty sees it in this state. The
omission was by design; it was by my orders that the workmen left it
thus, since I wished that your majesty should have the glory of
finishing this hall." "If you did it with this intention," replied the
sultan, "I take it kindly, and will give orders about it immediately."
He accordingly sent for the most considerable jewellers and goldsmiths
in his capital.

Aladdin then conducted the sultan into the saloon where he had regaled
his bride the preceding night. The princess entered immediately
afterward, and received her father with an air that shewed how much she
was satisfied with her marriage. Two tables were immediately spread with
the most delicious meats, all served up in gold dishes. The sultan was
much pleased with the cookery, and owned he had never eaten anything
more excellent. He said the same of the wines, which were delicious; but
what he most of all admired were four large buffets, profusely furnished
with large flagons, basins, and cups, all of massy gold, set with
jewels.

When the sultan rose from table, he was informed that the jewellers and
goldsmiths attended; upon which he returned to the hall, and shewed them
the window which was unfinished: "I sent for you," said he, "to fit up
this window in as great perfection as the rest; examine well, and make
all the despatch you can."

The jewellers and goldsmiths examined the three and twenty windows with
great attention, and after they had consulted together they returned and
presented themselves before the sultan, when the principal jeweller,
undertaking to speak for the rest, said: "Sir, we are all willing to
exert our utmost care and industry to obey your majesty; but among us
all we cannot furnish jewels enough for so great a work." "I have more
than are necessary," said the sultan; "come to my palace, and you shall
choose what may answer your purpose."

When the sultan returned to his palace, he ordered his jewels to be
brought out, and the jewellers took a great quantity, particularly those
Aladdin had made him a present of, which they soon used, without making
any great advance in their work. They came again several times for more,
and in a month's time had not finished half their work. In short, they
used all the jewels the sultan had, and borrowed of the vizier, but yet
the work was not half done.

Aladdin, who knew that all the sultan's endeavours to make this window
like the rest were in vain, sent for the jewellers and goldsmiths, and
not only commanded them to desist from their work, but ordered them to
undo what they had begun, and to carry all their jewels back to the
sultan and to the vizier. They undid in a few hours what they had been
six weeks about, and retired, leaving Aladdin alone in the hall. He took
the lamp, which he carried about him, rubbed it, and presently the genie
appeared. "Genie," said Aladdin, "I ordered thee to leave one of the
four and twenty windows of this hall imperfect and thou hast executed my
commands punctually; now I would have thee make it like the rest." The
genie immediately disappeared. Aladdin went out of the hall, and
returning soon after, found the window like the others.

In the meantime, the jewellers and goldsmiths repaired to the palace,
and were introduced into the sultan's presence; where the chief
jeweller, presenting the precious stones which he had brought back,
said, in the name of all the rest: "Your majesty knows how long we have
been upon the work you were pleased to set us about, in which we used
all imaginable industry. It was far advanced, when Prince Aladdin
commanded us not only to leave off, but to undo what we had already
begun, and bring your majesty your jewels back." The sultan asked them
if Aladdin had given them any reason for so doing, and they answering
that he had given them none, he ordered a horse to be brought, which he
mounted, and rode to his son-in-law's palace, with some few attendants
on foot. When he came there, he alighted at the staircase, which led to
the hall with the twenty-four windows, and went directly up to it,
without giving previous notice to Aladdin; but it happened that at that
very juncture Aladdin was opportunely there, and had just time to
receive him at the door.

The sultan, without giving Aladdin time to complain obligingly of his
not having given notice, that he might have acquitted himself with the
more becoming respect, said to him: "Son, I come myself to know the
reason why you commanded the jewellers to desist from work, and take to
pieces what they had done."

Aladdin disguised the true reason, which was, that the sultan was not
rich enough in jewels to be at so great an expense, but said: "I beg of
you now to see if anything is wanting."

The sultan went directly to the window which was left imperfect, and
when he found it like the rest, fancied that he was mistaken, examined
the two windows on each side, and afterward all the four and twenty; but
when he was convinced that the window which several workmen had been so
long about was finished in so short a time, he embraced Aladdin, and
kissed him between his eyes. "My son," said he, "what a man you are to
do such surprising things always in the twinkling of an eye: there is
not your fellow in the world; the more I know, the more I admire you."

Aladdin received these praises from the sultan with modesty, and replied
in these words: "Sir, it is a great honour to me to deserve your
majesty's goodwill and approbation, and I assure you, I shall study to
deserve them more."

The sultan returned to his palace, but would not let Aladdin attend him.
When he came there, he found his grand vizier waiting, to whom he
related the wonder he had witnessed with the utmost admiration, and in
such terms as left the minister no room to doubt but that the fact was
as the sultan related it; though he was the more confirmed in his
belief that Aladdin's palace was the effect of enchantment, as he had
told the sultan the first moment he saw it. He was going to repeat the
observation, but the sultan interrupted him, and said: "You told me so
once before; I see, vizier, you have not forgotten your son's espousals
to my daughter." The grand vizier plainly saw how much the sultan was
prepossessed, therefore avoided disputes, and let him remain in his own
opinion. The sultan as soon as he rose every morning went into the
closet, to look at Aladdin's palace, and would go many times in a day to
contemplate and admire it.

Aladdin did not confine himself in his palace; but took care to show
himself once or twice a week in the town, by going sometimes to one
mosque, and sometimes to another, to prayers; or to visit the grand
vizier, who affected to pay his court to him on certain days; or to do
the principal lords of the court the honour to return their visits after
he had regaled them at his palace. Every time he went out, he caused two
slaves, who walked by the side of his horse, to throw handfuls of money
among the people as he passed through the streets and squares, which
were generally on these occasions crowded. Besides, no one came to his
palace gates to ask alms but returned satisfied with his liberality. In
short, he so divided his time, that not a week passed but he went either
once or twice a-hunting, sometimes in the environs of the city,
sometimes farther off; at which time the villages through which he
passed felt the effects of his generosity, which gained him the love and
blessings of the people; and it was common for them to swear by his
head. With all these good qualities he showed a zeal for the public good
which could not be sufficiently applauded. He gave sufficient proofs of
both in a revolt on the borders of the kingdom; for he no sooner
understood that the sultan was levying an army to disperse the rebels
than he begged the command of it, which he found not difficult to
obtain. As soon as he was empowered, he marched with so much expedition,
that the sultan heard of the defeat of the rebels before he had received
an account of his son-in-law's arrival in the army.

Aladdin had conducted himself in this manner several years, when the
African magician, who undesignedly had been the instrument of raising
him to so high a pitch of prosperity, recalled him to his recollection
in Africa, whither, after his expedition, he had returned. And though he
was almost persuaded that Aladdin must have died miserably in the
subterranean abode where he had left him, yet he had the curiosity to
inform himself about his end with certainty; and as he was a great
geomancer, he took out of a cupboard a square, covered box, which he
used in his geomantic observations. After he had prepared and levelled
the sand which was in it with an intention to discover whether or not
Aladdin had died, he cast the points, drew the figures, and formed a
horoscope, by which, when he came to examine it, he found that instead
of dying in the cave, his victim had made his escape, lived splendidly,
was in possession of the wonderful lamp, had married a princess, and was
much honoured and respected.

The magician no sooner understood, by the rules of his diabolical art,
that Aladdin had arrived to this height of good fortune, than his face
became inflamed with anger, and he cried out in a rage: "This sorry
tailor's son has discovered the secret and virtue of the lamp! I
believed his death to be certain; but find that he enjoys the fruit of
my labour and study! I will, however, prevent his enjoying it long, or
perish in the attempt." He was not a great while deliberating on what he
should do, but the next morning mounted a barb, set forward, and never
stopped but to refresh himself and his horse, till he arrived at the
capital of China. He alighted, took up his lodging in a khan, and stayed
there the remainder of the day and the night.

The next day, his first object was to inquire what people said of
Aladdin; and, taking a walk through the town, he went to the most public
and frequented places, where persons of the best distinction met to
drink a certain warm liquor, which he had drunk often during his former
visit. As soon as he had seated himself, he was presented with a cup of
it, which he took; but listening at the same time to the discourse of
the company on each side of him, he heard them talking of Aladdin's
palace. When he had drunk off his liquor, he joined them, and taking
this opportunity, inquired particularly of what palace they spoke with
so much commendation. "From whence come you?" said the person to whom he
addressed himself; "you must certainly be a stranger not to have seen or
heard talk of Prince Aladdin's palace. I do not say," continued the man,
"that it is one of the wonders of the world, but that it is the only
wonder of the world; since nothing so grand, rich, and magnificent was
ever beheld. Go and see it, and then judge whether I have told you more
than the truth." "Forgive my ignorance," replied the African magician;
"I arrived here but yesterday from the farthest part of Africa, where
the fame of this palace had not reached when I came away. The business
which brought me hither was so urgent, that my sole object was to arrive
as soon as I could, without stopping anywhere, or making any
acquaintance. But I will not fail to go and see it, if you will do me
the favour to show me the way thither."

The person to whom the African magician addressed himself took a
pleasure in showing him the way to Aladdin's palace, and he got up and
went thither instantly. When he came to the palace, and had examined it
on all sides, he doubted not but that Aladdin had made use of the lamp
to build it. Without attending to the inability of a poor tailor's son,
he knew that none but the genies, the slaves of the lamp, could have
performed such wonders; and piqued to the quick at Aladdin's happiness
and splendour, he returned to the khan where he lodged.

The next point was to ascertain where the lamp was; whether Aladdin
carried it about with him, or where he kept it; and this he was to
discover by an operation of geomancy. As soon as he entered his lodging,
he took his square box of sand, which he always carried with him when he
travelled, and after he had performed some operations, he found that the
lamp was in Aladdin's palace, and so great was his joy at the discovery
that he could hardly contain himself. "Well," said he, "I shall have the
lamp, and I defy Aladdin to prevent my carrying it off, thus making him
sink to his original meanness, from which he has taken so high a
flight."

It was Aladdin's misfortune at that time to be absent in the chase for
eight days, and only three were expired, which the magician came to
know. After he had performed the magical operation he went to the
superintendent of the khan, entered into conversation with him on
indifferent subjects, and among the rest, told him he had been to see
Aladdin's palace; and after exaggerating on all that he had seen most
worthy of observation, added: "But my curiosity leads me further, and I
shall not be satisfied till I have seen the person to whom this
wonderful edifice belongs." "That will be no difficult matter," replied
the master of the khan; "there is not a day passes but he gives an
opportunity when he is in town, but at present he has been gone these
three days on a hunting-match, which will last eight."

The magician wanted to know no more; he took his leave of the
superintendent of the khan, and returning to his own chamber, said to
himself: "This is an opportunity I ought by no means to neglect." To
that end, he went to a coppersmith and asked for a dozen copper lamps:
the master of the shop told him he had not so many by him, but if he
would have patience till the next day, he would have them ready. The
magician appointed his time, and desired him to take care that they
should be handsome and well polished. After promising to pay him well,
he returned to his inn.

The next day the magician called for the twelve lamps, paid the man his
full price, put them into a basket which he bought on purpose, and with
the basket hanging on his arm, went directly to Aladdin's palace; as he
approached beginning to cry: "Who will change old lamps for new ones?"
As he went along, a crowd of children collected, who hooted, and thought
him, as did all who chanced to be passing by, a madman or a fool.

The African magician regarded not their scoffs, hootings, or all they
could say to him, but still continued crying: "Who will change old lamps
for new?" He repeated this so often, walking backward and forward in
front of the palace, that the princess, who was then in the hall with
the four and twenty windows, hearing a man cry something and not being
able to distinguish his words, owing to the hooting of the children, and
increasing mob about him, sent one of her women slaves to know what he
cried.

The slave was not long before she returned, and ran into the hall,
laughing so heartily that the princess could not forbear herself. "Well,
giggler," said the princess, "will you tell me what you laugh at?"
"Madam," answered the slave, laughing still, "who can forbear laughing,
to see a fool with a basket on his arm, full of fine new lamps, ask to
change them for old ones?"

Another female slave hearing this, said: "Now you speak of lamps, I know
not whether the princess may have observed it, but there is an old one
upon a shelf of the prince's robing-room. If the princess chooses, she
may have the pleasure of trying if this fool is so silly as to give a
new lamp for an old one, without taking anything for the exchange."

The lamp this slave spoke of was the wonderful lamp, which Aladdin had
laid upon the shelf before he departed for the chase: this he had done
several times before; but neither the princess, the slaves, nor the
eunuchs had ever taken notice of it. At all other times except when
hunting he carried it about his person.

The princess, who knew not the value of this lamp, and the interest that
Aladdin, not to mention herself, had to keep it safe, entered into the
pleasantry, and commanded a eunuch to take it and make the exchange. The
eunuch obeyed, went out of the hall, and no sooner got to the palace
gates than he saw the African magician, called to him, and showing him
the old lamp, said: "Give me a new lamp for this?"

The magician never doubted but this was the lamp he wanted. There could
be no other such in the palace, where every utensil was gold or silver.
He snatched it eagerly out of the eunuch's hand, and thrusting it as far
as he could into his breast, offered him his basket, and bade him choose
which he liked best. The eunuch picked out one, and carried it to the
princess; but the exchange was no sooner made than the place rang with
the shouts of the children, deriding the magician's folly.

The African magician gave everybody leave to laugh as much as they
pleased; he stayed not long near the palace, but made the best of his
way, without crying any longer; "New lamps for old ones." His end was
answered, and by his silence he got rid of the children and the mob.

As soon as he was out of the square between the two palaces, he hastened
down the streets which were the least frequented; and having no more
occasion for his lamps or basket, set all down in an alley where nobody
saw him: then going down another street or two, he walked till he came
to one of the city gates, and pursuing his way through the suburbs,
which were very extensive, at length reached a lonely spot, where he
stopped for a time to execute the design he had in contemplation, never
caring for his horse which he had left at the khan; but thinking himself
perfectly compensated by the treasure he had acquired.

In this place the African magician passed the remainder of the day, till
the darkest time of night, when he pulled the lamp out of his breast and
rubbed it. At that summons the genie appeared, and said: "What wouldst
thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave, and the slave of all
those who have that lamp in their hands; both I and the other slaves of
the lamp." "I command thee," replied the magician, "to transport me
immediately and the palace which thou and the other slaves of the lamp
have built in this city, with all the people in it, to Africa." The
genie made no reply, but with the assistance of the other genies, the
slaves of the lamp immediately transported him, and the palace entire,
to the spot whither he was desired to convey it.

As soon as the sultan rose the next morning, according to custom, he
went into his closet, to have the pleasure of contemplating and admiring
Aladdin's palace; but when he first looked that way, and instead of a
palace saw an empty space such as it was before the palace was built, he
thought he was mistaken, and rubbed his eyes; but when he looked again,
he still saw nothing more the second time than the first, though the
weather was fine, the sky clear, and the dawn advancing had made all
objects very distinct. He looked again in front, to the right and left,
but beheld nothing more than he had formerly been used to see from his
window. His amazement was so great, that he stood for some time turning
his eyes to the spot where the palace had stood, but where it was no
longer to be seen. He could not comprehend how so large a palace as
Aladdin's, which he had seen plainly every day for some years, and but
the day before, should vanish so soon, and not leave the least remains
behind.

"Certainly," said he to himself, "I am not mistaken; it stood there: if
it had fallen, the materials would have lain in heaps; and if it had
been swallowed up by an earthquake, there would be some mark left." At
last he retired to his apartment, not without looking behind him before
he quitted the spot, ordered the grand vizier to be sent for with
expedition, and in the meantime sat down, his mind agitated by so many
different conjectures that he knew not what to resolve.

The grand vizier did not make the sultan wait long for him, but came
with so much precipitation, that neither he nor his attendants, as they
passed, missed Aladdin's palace; neither did the porters, when they
opened the palace gates, observe any alteration.

When he came into the sultan's presence, he said to him: "The haste in
which your majesty sent for me makes me believe something extraordinary
has happened, since you know this is a day of public audience, and I
should not have failed of attending at the usual time." "Indeed," said
the sultan, "it is something very extraordinary, as you say, and you
will allow it to be so: tell me what is become of Aladdin's palace?"
"His palace!" replied the grand vizier in amazement; "I thought as I
passed it stood in its usual place." "Go into my closet," said the
sultan, "and tell me if you can see it."

The grand vizier went into the closet, where he was struck with no less
amazement than the sultan had been. When he was well assured that there
was not the least appearance of the palace, he returned to the sultan.
"Well," said the sultan, "have you seen Aladdin's palace?" "No,"
answered the vizier, "but your majesty may remember, that I had the
honour to tell you, that the edifice, which was the subject of your
admiration, was only the work of magic and a magician; but your majesty
would not pay the least attention to what I said." The sultan, who could
not deny what the grand vizier had represented to him, flew into the
greater passion: "Where is that impostor, that wicked wretch," said he,
"that I may have his head taken off immediately?" "Sir," replied the
grand vizier, "it is some days since he came to take his leave of your
majesty, on pretence of hunting; he ought to be sent for, to know what
is become of his palace, since he cannot be ignorant of what has been
transacted." "To send for him would be too great an indulgence," replied
the sultan: "command a detachment of horse to bring him to me loaded
with chains." The grand vizier gave orders for a detachment, and
instructed the officer who commanded the men how they were to act, that
Aladdin might not escape. The detachment pursued its orders; and about
five or six leagues from the town met him returning from the chase. The
officer advanced respectfully, and informed him the sultan was so
impatient to see him, that he had sent his party to accompany him home.

Aladdin had not the least suspicion of the true reason of their meeting
him; but when he came within half a league of the city, the detachment
surrounded him, when the officer addressed himself to him, and said;
"Prince, it is with great regret that I declare to you the sultan's
order to arrest you, and to carry you before him as a criminal: I beg
of you not to take it ill that we acquit ourselves of our duty, and to
forgive us." Aladdin, who felt himself innocent, was much surprised at
this declaration, and asked the officer if he knew what crime he was
accused of; who replied, he did not. Then Aladdin, finding that his
retinue was much inferior to this detachment, alighted from his horse,
and said to the officers: "Execute your orders; I am not conscious that
I have committed any offence against the sultan's person or government."
A heavy chain was immediately put about his neck, and fastened round his
body, so that both his arms were pinioned down; the officer then put
himself at the head of the detachment, and one of the troopers taking
hold of the end of the chain and proceeding after the officer, led
Aladdin, who was obliged to follow him on foot, into the city.

When this detachment entered the suburbs, the people, who saw Aladdin
thus led as a state criminal, never doubted but that his head was to be
cut off; and as he was generally beloved, some took sabres and other
arms; and those who had none gathered stones, and followed the escort.
Their numbers presently increased so much, that the soldiery began to
think it would be well if they could get into the sultan's palace before
Aladdin was rescued; to prevent which, according to the different extent
of the streets, they took care to cover the ground by extending or
closing. In this manner they with much difficulty arrived at the palace
square, and there drew up in a line, till their officer and troopers
with Aladdin had got within the gates, which were immediately shut.

Aladdin was carried before the sultan, who waited for him, attended by
the grand vizier; and as soon as he saw him he ordered the executioner,
who waited there for the purpose, to strike off his head without hearing
him, or giving him leave to clear himself. As soon as the executioner
had taken off the chain that was fastened about Aladdin's neck and body,
he made the supposed criminal kneel down, and tied a bandage over his
eyes. Then drawing his sabre, he took his aim by flourishing it three
times in the air, waiting for the sultan's giving the signal to strike.

At that instant the grand vizier perceiving that the populace had
crowded the great square before the palace, and were scaling the walls
in several places, said to the sultan, before he gave the signal: "I beg
of your majesty to consider what you are going to do, since you will
hazard your palace being destroyed; and who knows what fatal consequence
may follow?" "My palace forced!" replied the sultan; "who can have that
audacity?" "Sir," answered the grand vizier, "if your majesty will but
cast your eyes toward the great square, and on the palace walls, you
will perceive the truth of what I say."

The sultan was so much alarmed when he saw so great a crowd, and how
enraged they were, that he ordered the executioner to put his sabre
immediately into the scabbard, to unbind Aladdin, and at the same time
commanded the porters to declare to the people that the sultan had
pardoned him, and that they might retire. Those who had already got upon
the walls abandoned their design and got quickly down, overjoyed that
they had saved the life of a man they dearly loved, and published the
news amongst the rest, which was presently confirmed by the mace-bearers
from the top of the terraces. The justice which the sultan had done to
Aladdin soon disarmed the populace of their rage; the tumult abated and
the mob dispersed.

When Aladdin found himself at liberty, he turned toward the balcony, and
perceiving the sultan, raised his voice, and said to him in a moving
manner: "I beg of your majesty to add one favour more to that which I
have already received, which is, to let me know my crime?" "Your
crime," answered the sultan; "perfidious wretch! Do you not know it?
Come hither, and I will show it you." Aladdin went up, when the sultan,
going before him without looking at him, said: "Follow me;" and then led
him into his closet. When he came to the door, he said: "Go in; you
ought to know whereabouts your palace stood: look round and tell me what
is become of it?"

Aladdin looked, but saw nothing. He perceived the spot upon which his
palace had stood; but not being able to divine how it had disappeared,
was thrown into such great confusion and amazement that he could not
return one word of answer. The sultan, growing impatient, demanded of
him again: "Where is your palace, and what is become of my daughter?"
Aladdin, breaking silence, replied: "Sir, I perceive and own that the
palace which I have built is not in its place, but is vanished; neither
can I tell your majesty where it may be, but can assure you I had no
concern in its removal."

"I am not so much concerned about your palace," replied the sultan; "I
value my daughter ten thousand times more, and would have you find her
out, otherwise I will cause your head to be struck off, and no
consideration shall divert me from my purpose."

"I beg of your majesty," answered Aladdin, "to grant me forty days to
make my inquiries; and if in that time I have not the success I wish, I
will offer my head at the foot of your throne, to be disposed of at your
pleasure." "I give you the forty days you ask," said the sultan; "but
think not to escape my resentment if you fail; for I will find you out
in whatsoever part of the world you may conceal yourself."

Aladdin went out of the sultan's presence with great humiliation, and in
a condition worthy of pity. He crossed the courts of the palace,
hanging down his head, and in such great confusion that he durst not
lift up his eyes. The principal officers of the court, who had all
professed themselves his friends, instead of going up to him to comfort
him, turned their backs to avoid seeing him. But had they accosted him
with an offer of service, they would have no more known Aladdin. He did
not know himself, and was no longer in his senses, as plainly appeared
by his asking everybody he met, and at every house, if they had seen his
palace, or could tell him any news of it. These questions made the
generality believe that Aladdin was mad. Some laughed at him, but people
of sense and humanity, particularly those who had had any connection of
business or friendship with him, really pitied him. For three days he
rambled about the city in this manner, without coming to any resolution
or eating anything but what some compassionate people forced him to take
out of charity. At last he took the road to the country; and after he
had traversed several fields in wild uncertainty, at the approach of
night came to the bank of a river. There, possessed by his despair, he
said to himself: "Where shall I seek my palace? In what province,
country, or part of the world, shall I find that and my dear princess? I
shall never succeed; I would better free myself at once from fruitless
endeavours, and such bitter grief as preys upon me." He was just going
to throw himself into the river, but, as a good Mussulman, true to his
religion, he thought he should not do it without first saying his
prayers. Going to prepare himself, he went to the river's brink, in
order to perform the usual ablutions. The place being steep and
slippery, he slid down, and had certainly fallen into the river, but for
a little rock, which projected about two feet out of the earth. Happily
also for him, he still had on the ring which the African magician had
put on his finger before he went down into the subterranean abode to
fetch the precious lamp. In slipping down the bank he rubbed the ring so
hard by holding on the rock, that immediately the same genie appeared
whom he had seen in the cave where the magician had left him. "What
wouldst thou have?" said the genie. "I am ready to obey thee as thy
slave, and the slave of all those that have that ring on their finger;
both I and the other slaves of the ring."

Aladdin, agreeably surprised at an apparition he so little expected in
his present calamity, replied; "Save my life, genie, a second time,
either by showing me to the place where the palace I caused to be built
now stands, or immediately transporting it back where it first stood."
"What you command me," answered the genie, "is not wholly in my power; I
am only the slave of the ring; you must address yourself to the slave of
the lamp." "If that be the case," replied Aladdin, "I command thee, by
the power of the ring, to transport me to the spot where my palace
stands, in what part of the world soever it may be, and set me down
under the window of the Princess Badroulboudour." These words were no
sooner out of his mouth than the genie transported him into Africa, to
the midst of a large plain, where his palace stood, and placing him
exactly under the window of the princess's apartment, left him. All this
was done almost in an instant. Aladdin, notwithstanding the darkness of
the night, knew his palace again; but as the night was far advanced and
all was quiet, he retired to some distance, and sat down at the foot of
a large tree. There, full of hopes, and reflecting on his happiness, for
which he was indebted to chance, he found himself in a much more
comfortable situation than when he was arrested and carried before the
sultan, being now delivered from the immediate danger of losing his
life. He amused himself for some time with these agreeable thoughts; but
not having slept for two days, was unable to resist the drowsiness
which came upon him, but fell fast asleep.

The next morning, as soon as day appeared, Aladdin was agreeably
awakened by the singing not only of the birds which had roosted in the
tree under which he had passed the night, but also of those which
frequented the thick groves of the palace garden. When he cast his eyes
on that wonderful edifice, he felt inexpressible joy at thinking he
might soon be master of it again, and once more greet his dear Princess
Badroulboudour. Pleased with these hopes, he immediately arose, went
toward the princess's apartment, and walked some time under her window
in expectation of her rising, that he might see her. During this
expectation, he began to consider with himself whence the cause of his
misfortune had proceeded; and after mature reflection, no longer doubted
that it was owing to having trusted the lamp out of his sight. He
accused himself of negligence in letting it be a moment away from him.
But what puzzled him most was, that he could not imagine who had been so
envious of his happiness. He would soon have guessed this, if he had
known that both he and his palace were now in Africa, the very name of
which would soon have made him remember the magician, his declared
enemy; but the genie, the slave of the ring, had not made mention of the
name of the country, nor had Aladdin inquired.

The princess rose earlier that morning than she had done since her
transportation into Africa by the magician, whose presence she was
forced to support once a day, because he was master of the palace;
though she had always treated him so harshly that he dared not reside in
it. As she was dressing, one of the women looking through the window
perceived Aladdin, and instantly told her mistress. The princess, who
could not believe the joyful tidings, hastened herself to the window,
and seeing Aladdin, immediately opened it. The noise of opening the
window made Aladdin turn his head that way, and perceiving the princess
he saluted her with joy. "To lose no time," said she to him, "I have
sent to have the private door opened for you; enter, and come up." The
private door, which was just under the princess's apartment, was soon
opened, and Aladdin conducted up into the chamber. It is impossible to
express the joy of both at seeing each other, after so cruel a
separation. After embracing and shedding tears of joy, they sat down,
and Aladdin said: "I beg of you, princess, in Heaven's name, before we
talk of anything else, to tell me, both for your own sake, the sultan
your father's, and mine, what is become of an old lamp which I left upon
a shelf in my robing-chamber, when I departed for the chase."

"Alas! dear husband," answered the princess, "I was afraid our
misfortune might be owing to that lamp: and what grieves me most is,
that I have been the cause of it." "Princess," replied Aladdin, "do not
blame yourself, for I ought to have taken more care of it. But let us
now think only of repairing the loss; tell me what has happened, and
into whose hands it has fallen." The princess then related how she had
changed the old lamp for a new one, and how the next morning she found
herself in the unknown country they were then in, which she was told was
Africa, by the traitor who had transported her thither by his magic art.

"Princess," said Aladdin, interrupting her, "you have informed me who
the traitor is, by telling me we are in Africa. He is the most
perfidious of men; but this is neither a time nor place to give you a
full account of his villainies. I desire you only to tell me what he has
done with the lamp, and where he has put it." "He carries it carefully
wrapt up in his bosom," said the princess; "and this I can assure you,
because he pulled it out before me, and showed it to me in triumph."

"Princess," said Aladdin, "do not be displeased that I trouble you with
so many questions, since they are equally important to us both. But to
come to what most particularly concerns me: tell me, I conjure you, how
so wicked and perfidious a man treats you?" "Since I have been here,"
replied the princess, "he repairs once every day to see me; and I am
persuaded the little satisfaction he receives from his visits makes him
come no oftener. All his addresses tend to persuade me to break that
faith I have pledged to you, and to take him for my husband; giving me
to understand I need not entertain hopes of ever seeing you again, for
that you were dead, having had your head struck off by my father's
order. He added, to justify himself, that you were an ungrateful wretch;
that your good fortune was owing to him, and a great many other things
of that nature which I forbear to repeat: but as he received no other
answer from me but grievous complaints and tears, he was always forced
to retire with as little satisfaction as he came. I doubt not his
intention is to allow me time to overcome my grief, in hopes that
afterward I may change my sentiments. But my dear husband's presence
removes all my apprehensions."

"I am confident my attempts to punish the magician will not be in vain,"
replied Aladdin, "since my princess's fears are removed, and I think I
have found the means to deliver you from both your enemy and mine; to
execute this design, it is necessary for me to go to the town. I shall
return by noon, will then communicate my design, and what must be done
by you to ensure success. But that you may not be surprised, I think it
proper to acquaint you that I shall change my apparel, and beg of you
to give orders that I may not wait long at the private door, but that it
may be opened at the first knock."

When Aladdin was out of the palace, he looked round him on all sides,
and perceiving a peasant going into the country, hastened after him; and
when he had overtaken him, made a proposal to him to change habits,
which the man agreed to. When they had made the exchange, the countryman
went about his business, and Aladdin to the city. After traversing
several streets, he came to that part of the town where all descriptions
of merchants had their particular streets, according to their trades. He
went into that of the druggists; and going into one of the largest and
best-furnished shops, asked the druggist if he had a certain powder
which he named. The druggist, judging Aladdin by his habit to be very
poor, and that he had not money enough to pay for it, told him he had
it, but that it was very dear; upon which Aladdin penetrating his
thoughts, pulled out his purse, and showing him some gold, asked for
half a drachm of the powder; which the druggist weighed, wrapped up in
paper, and gave him, telling him the price was a piece of gold. Aladdin
put the money into his hand, and returned to the palace, where he waited
not long at the private door. When he came into the princess's
apartment, he said to her: "Princess, perhaps the aversion you tell me
you have for your captor may be an objection to your executing what I am
going to propose; but permit me to say it is proper that you should
dissemble a little, and do violence to your inclinations, if you would
deliver yourself from him.

"If you will take my advice," continued he, "dress yourself this moment
in one of your richest habits, and when the African magician comes, make
no difficulty to give him the best reception; so that he may imagine
time has removed your disgust at his addresses. In your conversation let
him understand that you strive to forget me; and that he may be the
more fully convinced, invite him to sup with you, and tell him you
should be glad to taste of some of the best wines of his country. He
will presently go to fetch you some. During his absence, put into one of
the cups which you are accustomed to drink of, this powder, and setting
it by, charge the slave you may order that night to attend you, on a
signal you shall agree upon, to bring that cup to you. When the magician
and you have eaten and drunk as much as you choose, let her bring you
the cup, and then change cups with him. He will esteem it so great a
favour that he will not refuse, but eagerly quaff it off; but no sooner
will he have drunk, than you will see him fall backward."

When Aladdin had finished, "I own," answered the princess, "I shall do
myself violence in consenting to make the magician such advances; but
what cannot one resolve to do against a cruel enemy? I will therefore
follow your advice, since both my repose and yours depend upon it."
After the princess had agreed to the measures proposed by Aladdin, he
took his leave and went and spent the rest of the day in the
neighbourhood of the palace till it was night, and he might safely
return to the private door.

The princess, who had remained inconsolable at being parted from her
husband, had, ever since their cruel separation, lived in great neglect
of her person. She had almost forgotten the neatness so becoming persons
of her sex and quality, particularly after the first time the magician
paid her a visit and she had understood by some of the women, who knew
him again, that it was he who had taken the old lamp in exchange for a
new one. However, the opportunity of taking the revenge he deserved made
her resolve to gratify Aladdin. As soon, therefore, as he was gone, she
sat down to dress, and was attired by her women to the best advantage
in the richest habit of her wardrobe. Her girdle was of the finest and
largest diamonds set in gold, her necklace of pearls, six on a side, so
well proportioned to that in the middle, which was the largest ever
seen, that the greatest sultanesses would have been proud to have been
adorned with only two of the smallest. Her bracelets, which were of
diamonds and rubies intermixed, corresponded admirably to the richness
of the girdle and necklace.

When the Princess Badroulboudour was completely dressed, she consulted
her glass and women upon her adjustment; and when she found she wanted
no charms to flatter the foolish passion of the African magician, she
sat down on a sofa expecting his arrival. The magician came at the usual
hour, and as soon as he entered the great hall where the princess waited
to receive him, she rose with an enchanting grace and smile, and pointed
with her hand to the most honourable place, waiting till he sat down,
that she might sit at the same time, which was a civility she had never
shown him before.

The African magician, dazzled more with the lustre of the princess's
eyes than the glittering of her jewels, was much surprised. The smiling
air with which she received him, so opposite to her former behaviour,
quite fascinated his heart. When he was seated, the princess, to free
him from his embarrassment, broke silence first, looking at him all the
time in such a manner as to make him believe that he was not so odious
to her as she had given him to understand hitherto, and said; "You are
doubtless amazed to find me so much altered to-day; but your surprise
will not be so great when I acquaint you, that I am naturally of a
disposition so opposite to melancholy and grief, that I always strive to
put them as far away as possible when I find the subject of them is
past. I have reflected on what you told me of Aladdin's fate, and know
my father's temper so well that I am persuaded, with you, he could not
escape the terrible effects of the sultan's rage: therefore, should I
continue to lament him all my life, my tears cannot recall him. For this
reason, since I have paid all the duties decency requires of me to his
memory, now he is in the grave I think I ought to endeavour to comfort
myself. These are the motives of the change you see in me; I am resolved
to banish melancholy entirely; and persuaded that you will bear me
company to-night, I have ordered a supper to be prepared; but as I have
no wines but those of China, I have a great desire to taste of the
produce of Africa, and doubt not your procuring some of the best."

The African magician, who had looked upon the happiness of getting so
soon and so easily into the Princess Badroulboudour's good graces as
impossible, could not think of words expressive enough to testify how
sensible he was of her favours: but to put an end the sooner to a
conversation which would have embarrassed him, if he had engaged farther
in it, he turned it upon the wines of Africa, and said: "Of all the
advantages Africa can boast, that of producing the most excellent wines
is one of the principal. I have a vessel of seven years old, which has
never been broached; and it is indeed not praising it too much to say it
is the finest wine in the world. If my princess," added he, "will give
me leave, I will go and fetch two bottles, and return again
immediately." "I should be sorry to give you that trouble," replied the
princess; "you had better send for them." "It is necessary I should go
myself," answered the African magician, "for nobody but myself knows
where the key of the cellar is laid, or has the secret to unlock the
door." "If it be so," said the princess, "make haste back; for the
longer you stay the greater will be my impatience, and we shall sit down
to supper as soon as you return." The African magician, full of hopes
of his expected happiness, rather flew than ran, and returned quickly
with the wine. The princess, not doubting but he would make haste, put
with her own hand the powder Aladdin had given her into the cup set
apart for that purpose. They sat down at the table opposite to each
other, the magician's back toward the buffet. The princess presented him
with the best at the table, and said to him: "If you please, I will
entertain you with a concert of vocal and instrumental music; but as we
are only two, I think conversation may be more agreeable." This the
magician took as a new favour. After they had eaten some time, the
princess called for some wine, drank the magician's health, and
afterward said to him: "Indeed you had a full right to commend your
wine, since I never tasted any so delicious." "Charming princess," said
he, holding in his hand the cup which had been presented to him, "my
wine becomes more exquisite by your approbation." "Then drink my
health," replied the princess: "you will find I understand wines." He
drank the princess's health, and returning the cup said; "I think myself
fortunate, princess, that I reserved this wine for so happy an occasion;
and own I never before drank any in every respect so excellent." When
they had each drunk two or three cups more, the princess, who had
completely charmed the African magician by her obliging behaviour, gave
the signal to the slave who served them with wine, bidding her bring the
cup which had been filled for herself, and at the same time bring the
magician a full goblet. When they both had their cups in their hands,
she said to him: "I know not how you express your loves in these parts
when drinking together. With us in China lovers reciprocally exchange
cups, and drink each other's health:" at the same time she presented to
him the cup which was in her hand, and held out her hand to receive his.
He hastened to make the exchange with the more pleasure, because he
looked upon this favour as a token of conquest over the princess, which
raised his rapture to the highest pitch. Before he drank, he said to
her, with the cup in his hand: "Indeed, princess, we Africans are not so
refined in the art of love as you Chinese: and your instructing me in a
lesson I was ignorant of, informs me how sensible I ought to be of the
favour done me. I shall never, lovely princess, forget my recovering, by
drinking out of your cup, that life, which your cruelty, had it
continued, must have made me despair of."

The princess, who began to be tired with his declarations, interrupted
him and said: "Let us drink first, and then say what you will
afterward:" at the same time she set the cup to her lips, while the
African magician, who was eager to get his wine off first, drank up the
very last drop. In finishing it, he leaned his head back to show his
eagerness, and remained some time in that state. The princess kept the
cup at her lips till she saw his eyes turn in his head, when he fell
backward lifeless on the sofa. The princess had no occasion to order the
private door to be opened to Aladdin; for her women were so disposed
from the great hall to the foot of the staircase, that the word was no
sooner given that the magician was fallen, than the door was immediately
opened. As soon as Aladdin entered the hall, he saw the magician
stretched backward on the sofa. The princess rose from her seat, and ran
overjoyed to embrace him; but he stopped her and said: "Princess, it is
not yet time; let me be left alone a moment, while I endeavour to
transport you back to China as speedily as you were brought from
thence." When the princess, her women and eunuchs, were gone out of the
hall, Aladdin shut the door, and, going directly to the dead body of the
magician, opened his vest, took out the lamp which was carefully
wrapped up, as the princess had told him, and unfolding and rubbing it,
the genie immediately appeared. "Genie," said Aladdin, "I have called to
command thee, on the part of thy good mistress, this lamp, to transport
this palace instantly into China, to the place from whence it was
brought hither." The genie bowed his head in token of obedience, and
disappeared. Immediately the palace was transported into China, and its
removal was only felt by two little shocks, the one when it was lifted
up, the other when it was set down, and both in a very short interval of
time.

From the time of the transportation of Aladdin's palace, the princess's
father had been inconsolable for the loss of her. Before the disaster he
used to go every morning into his closet to please himself with viewing
the palace; he went now many times in the day to renew his tears, and
plunge himself into the deepest melancholy, by reflecting how he had
lost what was most dear to him in this world.

The very morning of the return to the palace, the sultan went into his
closet to indulge his sorrows. Absorbed in himself, and in a pensive
mood, he cast his eyes toward the spot, expecting only to see an open
space; but perceiving the vacancy filled up, he at first imagined the
appearance to be the effect of a fog; looking more attentively, he was
convinced beyond the power of doubt that it was his son-in-law's palace.
Joy and gladness succeeded to sorrow and grief. He returned immediately
into his apartment, and ordered a horse to be saddled and brought to him
without delay, which he mounted that instant, thinking he could not make
haste enough to the palace.

Aladdin, who foresaw what would happen, rose that morning by daybreak,
put on one of the most magnificent habits his wardrobe afforded, and
went up into the hall of twenty-four windows, from whence he perceived
the sultan approaching, and got down soon enough to receive him at the
foot of the great staircase. "Aladdin," said the sultan, "I cannot speak
to you till I have seen and embraced my daughter." The happy father was
then led to the princess's apartment and embraced her with his face
bathed in tears of joy. The sultan was some time before he could open
his lips, so great was his surprise and joy to find his daughter again,
after he had given her up for lost; and the princess, upon seeing her
father, let fall tears of rapture and affection.

At last the sultan broke silence, and said: "I would believe, daughter,
your joy to see me makes you seem as little changed as if no misfortune
had befallen you; yet I cannot be persuaded but that you have suffered
much alarm; for a large palace cannot be so suddenly transported as
yours has been, without causing great fright and apprehension. I would
have you tell me all that has happened, and conceal nothing from me."

The princess, who took great pleasure in giving the sultan the
satisfaction he demanded, said: "If I appear so little altered, I beg of
your majesty to consider that I received new life yesterday morning by
the presence of my dear husband and deliverer, Aladdin, whom I looked
upon and bewailed as lost to me. My greatest suffering was to find
myself forced not only from your majesty, but from my dear husband; not
only from the love I bore him, but from the uneasiness I laboured under
through fear that he, though innocent, might feel the effects of your
anger. As to what relates to my transportation, I was myself the
innocent cause of it." To persuade the sultan of the truth of what she
said, she gave him a full account of how the African magician had
disguised himself, and offered to change new lamps for old ones; how she
had amused herself in making that exchange; how the palace and herself
were carried away and transported into Africa, with the magician, who
was recognised by two of her women and the eunuch who made the exchange
of the lamp, when he had the audacity, after the success of his daring
enterprise, to propose himself for her husband; how he persecuted her
till Aladdin's arrival; how they had concerted measures to get the lamp
from him again, and the success they had fortunately met with by her
dissimulation in inviting him to supper, and giving him the cup with the
powder prepared for him. "For the rest," added she, "I leave it to
Aladdin to recount."

Aladdin had not much to tell the sultan, but only said: "When the
private door was opened I went up into the great hall, where I found the
magician lying dead on the sofa; and as I thought it not proper for the
princess to stay there any longer, I desired her to go down into her own
apartment, with her women and eunuchs. As soon as I was alone, and had
taken the lamp out of the magician's breast, I made use of the same
secret he had done, to remove the palace, and carry off the princess;
and by that means the palace was reconveyed to the place where it stood
before; and I have the happiness to restore the princess to your
majesty. But that your majesty may not think that I impose upon you, if
you will give yourself the trouble to go up into the hall, you may see
the magician punished as he deserved."

The sultan rose instantly and went into the hall, where, when he saw the
African magician dead, and his face already livid by the strength of the
poison, he embraced Aladdin with great tenderness, and said: "My son, be
not displeased at my proceedings against you; they arose from my
paternal love; and therefore you ought to forgive the excesses to which
it hurried me." "Sir," replied Aladdin, "I have not the least reason to
complain of your majesty's conduct, since you did nothing but what your
duty required. This infamous magician, the basest of men, was the sole
cause of my misfortune. When your majesty has leisure, I will give you
an account of another villainous action he was guilty of toward me,
which was no less black and base than this." "I will take an
opportunity, and that very shortly," replied the sultan, "to hear it;
but in the meantime let us think only of rejoicing."

The sultan then commanded the drums, trumpets, cymbals, and other
instruments of music to announce his joy to the public, and a festival
of ten days to be proclaimed for the return of the princess and Aladdin.

Within a few years afterward, the sultan died in a good old age, and as
he left no male children, the Princess Badroulboudour, as lawful heir of
the throne, succeeded him, and communicating the power to Aladdin, they
reigned together many years, and left a numerous and illustrious
progeny.




THE STORY OF PRINCE AGIB


I was a king, and the son of a king; and when my father died, I
succeeded to his throne, and governed my subjects with justice and
beneficence. I took pleasure in sea-voyages; and my capital was on the
shore of an extensive sea, interspersed with fortified and garrisoned
islands, which I desired, for my amusement, to visit; I therefore
embarked with a fleet of ten ships, and took with me provisions
sufficient for a whole month. I proceeded twenty days, after which there
arose against us a contrary wind; but at daybreak it ceased, and the sea
became calm, and we arrived at an island, where we landed, and cooked
some provisions and ate; after which we remained there two days. We then
continued our voyage; and when twenty days more had passed, we found
ourselves in strange waters, unknown to the captain, and desired the
watch to look out from the mast head: so he went aloft, and when he had
come down he said to the captain: "I saw, on my right hand, fish
floating upon the surface of the water; and looking toward the midst of
the sea, I perceived something looming in the distance, sometimes black,
and sometimes white."

When the captain heard this report of the watch, he threw his turban on
the deck, and plucked his beard, and said to those who were with him:
"Receive warning of our destruction, which will befall all of us: not
one will escape!" So saying, he began to weep; and all of us in like
manner bewailed our lot. I desired him to inform us of that which the
watch had seen. "O my lord," he replied, "know that we have wandered
from our course since the commencement of the contrary wind that was
followed in the morning by a calm, in consequence of which we remained
stationary two days: from that period we have deviated from our course
for twenty-one days, and we have no wind to carry us back from the fate
which awaits us after this day. To-morrow we shall arrive at a mountain
of black stone, called loadstone: the current is now bearing us
violently toward it, and the ships will fall in pieces, and every nail
in them will fly to the mountain, and adhere to it; for God hath given
to the loadstone a secret property by virtue of which everything of iron
is attracted toward it. On that mountain is such a quantity of iron as
no one knoweth but God, whose name be exalted; for from times of old
great numbers of ships have been destroyed by the influence of that
mountain. There is, upon the summit of the mountain, a cupola of brass
supported by ten columns, and upon the top of this is a horseman upon a
horse of brass, having in his hand a brazen spear, and upon his breast
suspended a tablet of lead, upon which are engraved mysterious names and
talismans: and as long, O King, as this horseman remains upon the horse,
so long will every ship that approaches be destroyed, with every person
on board, and all the iron contained in it will cleave to the mountain:
no one will be safe until the horseman shall have fallen from the
horse." The captain then wept bitterly; and we felt assured that our
destruction was inevitable, and every one of us bade adieu to his
friend.

On the following morning we drew near to the mountain; the current
carried us toward it with violence, and when the ships were almost close
to it, they fell asunder, and all the nails, and everything else that
was of iron, flew from them toward the loadstone. It was near the close
of day when the ships fell in pieces. Some of us were drowned, and some
escaped; but the greater number were drowned, and of those who saved
their lives none know what became of the others, so stupefied were they
by the waves and the boisterous wind. As for myself, God, whose name be
exalted, spared me on account of the trouble and torment and affliction
that He had predestined to befall me. I placed myself upon a plank, and
the wind and waves cast it upon the mountain; and when I had landed, I
found a practicable way to the summit, resembling steps cut in the rock:
so I exclaimed: "In the name of God!" and offered up a prayer, and
attempted the ascent, holding fast by the notches; and presently God
stilled the wind, so that I arrived in safety at the summit. Rejoicing
greatly in my escape, I immediately entered the cupola, and performed
prayers in gratitude to God for my preservation; after which I slept
beneath the cupola, and heard a voice saying to me: "O son of Khasib,
when thou awakest, dig beneath thy feet, and thou wilt find a bow of
brass, and three arrows of lead, whereon are engraved talismans: then
take the bow and arrows and shoot at the horseman that is upon the top
of the cupola, and relieve mankind from this great affliction; for when
thou hast shot at the horseman he will fall into the sea; the bow will
also fall, and do thou bury it in its place; and as soon as thou hast
done this, the sea will swell and rise until it attains the summit of
the mountain; and there will appear upon it a boat bearing a man,
different from him whom thou shalt have cast down, and he will come to
thee, having an oar in his hand: then do thou embark with him; but utter
not the name of God; and he will convey thee in ten days to a safe sea,
where, on thy arrival, thou wilt find one who will take thee to thy
city. All this shall be done if thou utter not the name of God."

Awaking from my sleep, I sprang up, and did as the voice had directed. I
shot at the horseman, and he fell into the sea; and the bow having
fallen from my hand, I buried it: the sea then became troubled, and rose
to the summit of the mountain, and when I had stood waiting there a
little while, I beheld a boat in the midst of the sea, approaching me. I
praised God, whose name be exalted, and when the boat came to me, I
found in it a man of brass, with a tablet of lead upon his breast,
engraven with names and talismans. Without uttering a word, I embarked
in the boat, and the man rowed me ten successive days, after which I
beheld the islands of security, whereupon, in the excess of my joy, I
exclaimed: "There is no deity but God! God is most great!"--and as soon
as I had done this, the man cast me out of the boat, and sank in the
sea.

Being able to swim, I swam until night, when my arms and shoulders were
tired, and, in this perilous situation, I repeated the profession of the
faith, and gave myself up as lost; but the sea rose with the violence of
the wind, and a wave like a vast castle threw me upon the land, in order
to the accomplishment of the purpose of God. I ascended the shore, and
after I had wrung out my clothes, and spread them upon the ground to
dry, I slept; and in the morning I put on my clothes again, and, looking
about to see which way I should go, I found a tract covered with trees;
and when I had walked round it, I found that I was upon a small island
in the midst of the sea; upon which I said within myself: "Every time
that I escape from one calamity I fall into another that is worse:" but
while I was reflecting upon my unfortunate case, and wishing for death,
I beheld a vessel bearing a number of men. I arose immediately, and
climbed into a tree; and lo, the vessel came to the shore, and there
landed from it ten black slaves bearing axes. They proceeded to the
middle of the island, and, digging up the earth, uncovered and lifted up
a trap-door, after which they returned to the vessel, and brought from
it bread and flour, and clarified butter and honey, and sheep and
everything that the wants of an inhabitant would require, continuing to
pass backward and forward between the vessel and the trap-door, bringing
loads from the former, and entering the latter, until they had removed
all the stores from the ship. They then came out of the vessel with
various clothes of the most beautiful description, and in the midst of
them was an old sheikh, enfeebled and wasted by extreme age, leading by
the hand a young man cast in the mould of graceful symmetry, and
invested with such perfect beauty as deserved to be a subject for
proverbs. He was like a fresh and slender twig, enchanting and
captivating every heart by his elegant form. The party proceeded to the
trap-door, and, entering it, became concealed from my eyes.

They remained beneath about two hours, or more; after which, the sheikh
and the slaves came out; but the youth came not with them; and they
replaced the earth, and embarked and set sail. Soon after, I descended
from the tree, and went to the excavation. I removed the earth, and,
entering the aperture, saw a flight of wooden steps, which I descended;
and, at the bottom, I beheld a handsome dwelling-place, furnished with a
variety of silken carpets; and there was the youth, sitting upon a high
mattress, with sweet-smelling flowers and fruits placed before him. On
seeing me, his countenance became pale; but I saluted him, and said:
"Let thy mind be composed, O my master: thou hast nothing to fear; for I
am a man, and the son of a king, like thyself: fate hath impelled me to
thee, that I may cheer thee in thy solitude." The youth, when he heard
me thus address him, and was convinced that I was one of his own
species, rejoiced exceedingly at my arrival, his colour returned, and,
desiring me to approach him, he said: "O my brother, my story is
wonderful: my father is a jeweller; he had slaves who made voyages
by his orders, for the purposes of commerce, and he had dealings with
kings; but he had never been blest with a son; and he dreamt that he was
soon to have a son, but one whose life would be short; and he awoke
sorrowful. Shortly after, in accordance with the decrees of God, my
mother gave birth to me; and my father was greatly rejoiced: the
astrologers, however, came to him, and said: Thy son will live fifteen
years: his fate is intimated by the fact that there is in the sea a
mountain called the Mountain of Loadstone, whereon is a horseman on a
horse of brass, on the former of which is a tablet of lead suspended to
his neck; and when the horseman shall be thrown down from his horse, thy
son will be slain: the person who is to slay him is he who will throw
down the horseman, and his name is King Agib, the son of King Khasib. My
father was greatly afflicted at this announcement; and when he had
reared me until I had nearly attained the age of fifteen years, the
astrologers came again, and informed him that the horseman had fallen
into the sea, and that it had been thrown down by King Agib, the son of
King Khasib; on hearing which, he prepared for me this dwelling, and
here left me to remain until the completion of the term, of which there
now remain ten days. All this he did from fear lest King Agib should
kill me."

[Illustration]

_And when the boat came to me I found in it a man of brass, with a
tablet of lead upon his breast, engraven with names and talismans._

When I heard this, I was filled with wonder, and said within myself: "I
am King Agib, the son of King Khasib, and it was I who threw down the
horseman; but, by Allah, I will neither kill him nor do him any injury."
Then said I to the youth: "Far from thee be both destruction and harm,
if it be the will of God: thou hast nothing to fear: I will remain with
thee to serve thee, and will go forth with thee to thy father, and beg
of him to send me back to my country, for the which he will obtain a
reward." The youth rejoiced at my words, and I sat and conversed with
him until night, when I spread his bed for him, and covered him, and
slept near to his side. And in the morning I brought him water, and he
washed his face, and said to me: "May God requite thee for me with every
blessing. If I escape from King Agib, I will make my father reward thee
with abundant favours." "Never," I replied, "may the day arrive that
would bring thee misfortune!" I then placed before him some
refreshments, and after we had eaten together, we passed the day
conversing with the utmost cheerfulness.

I continued to serve him for nine days; and on the tenth day the youth
rejoiced at finding himself in safety, and said to me: "O my brother, I
wish that thou wouldst in thy kindness warm for me some water, that I
may wash myself and change my clothes; for I have smelt the odour of
escape from death, in consequence of thy assistance." "With pleasure," I
replied; and I arose, and warmed the water; after which, he entered a
place concealed from my view, and, having washed himself and changed his
clothes, laid himself upon the mattress to rest after his bath. He then
said to me: "Cut up for me, O my brother, a water-melon, and mix its
juice with some sugar:" so I arose, and, taking a melon, brought it upon
a plate, and said to him; "Knowest thou, O my master, where is the
knife?" "See, here it is," he answered, "upon the shelf over my head." I
sprang up hastily, and took it from its sheath, and as I was drawing
back, my foot slipped, as God had decreed, and I fell upon the youth,
grasping in my hand the knife, which entered his body, and he died
instantly. When I perceived that he was dead, and that I had killed him,
I uttered a loud shriek, and beat my face, and rent my clothes: saying:
"This is, indeed, a calamity! O my Lord, I implore thy pardon, and
declare to Thee my innocence of his death! Would that I had died before
him!"

With these reflections I ascended the steps, and, having replaced the
trap-door, returned to my first station, and looked over the sea, where
I saw the vessel that had come before, approaching, and cleaving the
waves in its rapid course. Upon this I said within myself: "Now will the
men come forth from the vessel, and find the youth slain, and they will
slay me also:" so I climbed into a tree, and concealed myself among its
leaves, and sat there till the vessel arrived and cast anchor, when the
slaves landed with the old sheikh, the father of the youth, and went to
the place, and removed the earth. They were surprised at finding it
moist, and, when they had descended the steps, they discovered the youth
lying on his back, exhibiting a face beaming with beauty, though dead,
and clad in white and clean clothing, with the knife remaining in his
body. They all wept at the sight, and the father fell down in a swoon,
which lasted so long that the slaves thought he was dead. At length,
however, he recovered, and came out with the slaves, who had wrapped the
body of the youth in his clothes. They then took back all that was in
the subterranean dwelling to the vessel, and departed.

