
This discourse afflicted the fisherman extremely: "I am very
unfortunate," cried he, "to come hither to do such a kindness to one
that is so ungrateful. I beg you to consider your injustice, and revoke
such an unreasonable oath; pardon me, and Heaven will pardon you; if you
grant me my life, Heaven will protect you from all attempts against your
own." "No, thy death is resolved on," said the genie, "only choose in
what manner thou wilt die." The fisherman, perceiving the genie to be
resolute, was extremely grieved, not so much for himself, as on account
of his three children, and bewailed the misery they must be reduced to
by his death. He endeavoured still to appease the genie, and said,
"Alas! be pleased to take pity on me, in consideration of the service I
have done you." "I have told thee already," replied the genie, "it is
for that very reason I must kill thee." "That is strange," said the
fisherman, "are you resolved to reward good with evil? The proverb truly
says, 'He who does good to one who deserves it not, is always ill
rewarded.'" "Do not lose time," interrupted the genie; "all thy
chattering shall not divert me from my purpose; make haste, and tell me
what kind of death thou preferrest?"

Necessity is the mother of invention. The fisherman bethought himself of
a stratagem. "Since I must die then," said he to the genie, "I submit to
the will of Heaven; but before I choose the manner of my death, I
conjure you, by the great name which was engraven upon the seal of the
prophet Solomon, to answer me truly the question I am going to ask you."

The genie finding himself obliged to a positive answer by this
adjuration, trembled, and replied to the fisherman: "Ask what thou wilt,
but make haste."

The genie having thus promised to speak the truth, the fisherman said to
him: "I wish to know if you were actually in this vessel: dare you swear
it by the name of the great God?" "Yes," replied the genie, "I do swear
by His great name that I was." "In good faith," answered the fisherman,
"I cannot believe you; the vessel is not capable of holding one of your
size, and how should it be possible that your whole body could lie in
it?" "I swear to thee, notwithstanding," replied the genie, "that I was
there just as you see me here. Is it possible that thou dost not believe
me after the solemn oath I have taken?" "Truly not I," said the
fisherman; "nor will I believe you, unless you go into the vessel
again."

Upon this the body of the genie dissolved and changed itself into smoke,
extending as before upon the seashore; and at last being collected, it
began to re-enter the vessel, which it continued to do by a slow and
equal motion, till no part remained out; when immediately a voice came
forth, which said to the fisherman: "Well, incredulous fellow, dost thou
not believe me now?"

The fisherman, instead of answering the genie, took the cover of lead,
and having speedily replaced it on the vessel, "Genie," cried he, "now
it is your turn to beg my favour, and to choose which way I shall put
you to death; but it is better that I should throw you into the sea,
whence I took you: and then I will build a house upon the shore, where I
will reside and give notice to all fishermen who come to throw in their
nets, to beware of such a wicked genie as you are, who have made an oath
to kill him that shall set you at liberty."

The genie, enraged at these expressions, struggled to free himself; but
it was impossible, for the impression of Solomon's seal prevented him.
Perceiving that the fisherman had the advantage of him, he thought fit
to dissemble his anger; "Fisherman," said he, "take heed you do not what
you threaten; for what I spoke to you was only by way of jest." "O
genie!" replied the fisherman, "thou who wast but a moment ago the
greatest of all genies, and now art the least of them, thy crafty
discourse will signify nothing, to the sea thou shalt return. If thou
hast been there already so long as thou hast told me, thou mayest very
well stay there till the day of judgment. I begged of thee, in God's
name, not to take away my life, and thou didst reject my prayers; I am
obliged to treat thee in the same manner."

The genie omitted nothing that he thought likely to prevail with the
fisherman: "Open the vessel," said he, "give me my liberty, and I
promise to satisfy you to your own content." "Thou art a traitor,"
replied the fisherman, "I should deserve to lose my life, if I were such
a fool as to trust thee."

"My good fisherman," replied the genie, "I conjure you once more not to
be guilty of such cruelty; consider that it is not good to avenge one's
self, and that, on the other hand, it is commendable to do good for
evil; do not treat me as Imama formerly treated Ateca." "And what did
Imama to Ateca?" inquired the fisherman. "Ho!" cried the genie, "if you
have a mind to be informed, open the vessel: do you think that I can be
in a humour to relate stories in so strait a prison? I will tell you as
many as you please, when you have let me out." "No," said the fisherman,
"I will not let thee out; it is in vain to talk of it; I am just going
to throw thee into the bottom of the sea." "Hear me one word more,"
cried the genie; "I promise to do you no hurt; nay, far from that, I
will show you a way to become exceedingly rich."

The hope of delivering himself from poverty prevailed with the
fisherman. "I could listen to thee," said he, "were there any credit to
be given to thy word; swear to me, by the great name of God, that thou
wilt faithfully perform what thou promisest, and I will open the vessel;
I do not believe thou wilt dare to break such an oath."

The genie swore to him, upon which the fisherman immediately took off
the covering of the vessel. At that instant the smoke ascended, and the
genie, having resumed his form, the first thing he did was to kick the
vessel into the sea. This action alarmed the fisherman. "Genie," said
he, "will not you keep the oath you just now made?"

The genie laughed at his fear, and answered: "Fisherman, be not afraid,
I only did it to divert myself, and to see if you would be alarmed at
it; but to convince you that I am in earnest, take your nets and follow
me." As he spoke these words, he walked before the fisherman, who having
taken up his nets, followed him, but with some distrust. They passed by
the town, and came to the top of a mountain, from whence they descended
into a vast plain, which brought them to a lake that lay betwixt four
hills.

When they reached the side of the lake, the genie said to the fisherman:
"Cast in your nets and catch fish." The fisherman did not doubt of
taking some, because he saw a great number in the water; but he was
extremely surprised when he found they were of four colours; white, red,
blue, and yellow. He threw in his nets and brought out one of each
colour. Having never seen the like before, he could not but admire them,
and, judging that he might get a considerable sum for them, he was very
joyful. "Carry those fish," said the genie to him, "and present them to
your sultan; he will give you more money for them. You may come daily to
fish in this lake; but I give you warning not to throw in your nets
above once a day, otherwise you will repent." Having spoken thus, he
struck his foot upon the ground, which opened, and after it had
swallowed him up, closed again.

The fisherman, being resolved to follow the genie's advice, forbore
casting in his nets a second time, and returned to the town very well
satisfied, and making a thousand reflections upon his adventure. He went
immediately to the sultan's palace to offer his fish, and his majesty
was much surprised when he saw the wonders which the fisherman
presented. He took them up one after another, and viewed them with
attention; and after having admired them a long time, "Take those fish,"
said he to his vizier, "and carry them to the cook whom the emperor of
the Greeks has sent me. I cannot imagine but that they must be as good
as they are beautiful."

The vizier carried them as he was directed, and delivering them to the
cook, said: "Here are four fish just brought to the sultan; he orders
you to dress them." He then returned to the sultan, who commanded him to
give the fisherman four hundred pieces of gold, which he did
accordingly.

The fisherman, who had never seen so much money, could scarcely believe
his good fortune, but thought the whole must be a dream, until he found
it otherwise, by being able to provide necessaries for his family with
the produce of his nets.

As soon as the sultan's cook had cleaned the fish, she put them upon the
fire in a frying-pan, with oil, and when she thought them fried enough
on one side, she turned them upon the other; but, O monstrous prodigy!
scarcely were they turned, when the wall of the kitchen divided, and a
young lady of wonderful beauty entered from the opening. She held a rod
in her hand and was clad in flowered satin, with pendants in her ears, a
necklace of large pearls, and bracelets of gold set with rubies. She
moved toward the frying-pan, to the great amazement of the cook, and
striking one of the fish with the end of the rod, said: "Fish, fish, are
you in your duty?" The fish having answered nothing, she repeated these
words, and then the four fish lifted up their heads, and replied: "Yes,
yes: if you reckon, we reckon; if you pay your debts, we pay ours; if
you fly, we overcome, and are content." As soon as they had finished
these words, the lady overturned the frying-pan, and returned into the
open part of the wall, which closed immediately, and became as it was
before.

The cook was greatly frightened at what had happened, and coming a
little to herself went to take up the fish that had fallen on the
hearth, but found them blacker than coal and not fit to be carried to
the sultan. This grievously troubled her, and she fell to weeping most
bitterly. "Alas!" said she, "what will become of me? If I tell the
sultan what I have seen, I am sure he will not believe me, but will be
enraged against me."

While she was thus bewailing herself, the grand vizier entered, and
asked her if the fish were ready. She told him all that had occurred,
which we may easily imagine astonished him; but without speaking a word
of it to the sultan he invented an excuse that satisfied him, and
sending immediately for the fisherman bid him bring four more such fish,
for a misfortune had befallen the others, so that they were not fit to
be carried to the royal table. The fisherman, without saying anything of
what the genie had told him, told the vizier he had a great way to go
for them, in order to excuse himself from bringing them that day, but
said that he would certainly bring them on the morrow.

Accordingly the fisherman went away by night, and coming to the lake,
threw in his nets betimes next morning, took four fish like the former,
and brought them to the vizier at the hour appointed. The minister took
them himself, carried them to the kitchen, and shutting himself up with
the cook, she cleaned them and put them on the fire. When they were
fried on one side, and she had turned them upon the other, the kitchen
wall again opened, and the same lady came in with the rod in her hand,
struck one of the fish, spoke to it as before, and all four gave her the
same answer.

After they had spoken to the young lady, she overturned the frying-pan
with her rod, and retired into the wall. The grand vizier being witness
to what had passed, "This is too wonderful and extraordinary," said he,
"to be concealed from the sultan; I will inform him of this prodigy."

The sultan, being much surprised, sent immediately for the fisherman,
and said to him: "Friend, cannot you bring me four more such fish?" The
fisherman replied: "If your majesty will be pleased to allow me three
days, I will do it." Having obtained his time, he went to the lake
immediately, and at the first throwing in of his net he caught four
fish, and brought them directly to the sultan, who was so much the more
rejoiced, as he did not expect them so soon, and ordered him four
hundred pieces of gold. As soon as the sultan had the fish, he ordered
them to be carried into his closet, with all that was necessary for
frying them; and having shut himself up with the vizier, the minister
cleaned them, put them into the pan, and when they were fried on one
side, turned them upon the other; then the wall of the closet opened,
but instead of the young lady, there came out a black, in the habit of a
slave, and of a gigantic stature, with a great green staff in his hand.
He advanced toward the pan, and touching one of the fish with his staff,
said, with a terrible voice: "Fish, are you in your duty?" At these
words the fish raised up their heads, and answered: "Yes, yes; we are;
if you reckon, we reckon; if you pay your debts, we pay ours; if you
fly, we overcome and are content."

The fish had no sooner finished these words, than the black threw the
pan into the middle of the closet, and reduced them to a coal. Having
done this, he retired fiercely, and entering again into the aperture, it
closed, and the wall appeared just as it did before.

"After what I have seen," said the sultan to the vizier, "it will not be
possible for me to be easy; these fish, without doubt, signify something
extraordinary." He sent for the fisherman, and when he came, said to
him: "Fisherman, the fish you have brought us make me very uneasy; where
did you catch them?" "Sir," answered he, "I fished for them in a lake
situated betwixt four hills, beyond the mountain that we see from
hence." "Know'st thou not that lake?" said the sultan to the vizier.
"No," replied the vizier, "I never so much as heard of it, although I
have for sixty years hunted beyond that mountain." The sultan asked the
fisherman how far the lake might be from the palace. The fisherman
answered it was not above three hours' journey; upon this assurance the
sultan commanded all his court to take horse, and the fisherman served
them for a guide. They all ascended the mountain, and at the foot of it
they saw, to their great surprise, a vast plain that nobody had observed
till then, and at last they came to the lake, which they found to be
situated betwixt four hills, as the fisherman had described. The water
was so transparent that they observed all the fish to be like those
which the fisherman had brought to the palace.

The sultan stood upon the bank of the lake, and after beholding the fish
with admiration, demanded of his courtiers if it were possible they had
never seen this lake which was within so short a distance of the town.
They all answered that they had never so much as heard of it.

"Since you all agree that you never heard of it," said the sultan, "and
as I am no less astonished than you are at this novelty, I am resolved
not to return to my palace till I learn how this lake came here, and why
all the fish in it are of four colours." Having spoken thus, he ordered
his court to encamp; and immediately his pavilion and the tents of his
household were planted upon the banks of the lake.

When night came the sultan retired under his pavilion, and spoke to the
grand vizier thus: "Vizier, my mind is uneasy; this lake transported
hither, the black that appeared to us in my closet, and the fish that we
heard speak; all these things so much excite my curiosity that I cannot
resist my impatient desire to have it satisfied. To this end I am
resolved to withdraw alone from the camp, and I order you to keep my
absence secret: stay in my pavilion, and to-morrow morning, when the
emirs and courtiers come to attend my levee, send them away and tell
them that I am somewhat indisposed and wish to be alone; and the
following days tell them the same thing, till I return."

The grand vizier endeavoured to divert the sultan from this design; he
represented to him the danger to which he might be exposed, and that all
his labour might perhaps be in vain; but it was to no purpose; the
sultan was resolved. He put on a suit fit for walking and took his
cimeter; and as soon as he found that all was quiet in the camp, went
out alone, and passed over one of the hills without much difficulty; he
found the descent still more easy, and when he came to the plain, walked
on till the sun arose, and then he saw before him, at a considerable
distance, a vast building. He rejoiced at the sight, in hopes of
receiving there the information he sought. When he drew near, he found
it was a magnificent palace, or rather a strong castle, of black
polished marble, and covered with fine steel, as smooth as glass. Being
highly pleased that he had so speedily met with something worthy his
curiosity, he stopped before the front of the castle, and considered it
with attention.

He then advanced toward the gate, which had two leaves, one of them
open; though he might immediately have entered, yet he thought it best
to knock. This he did at first softly, and waited for some time; but
seeing no one, and supposing he had not been heard, he knocked harder
the second time, and after that he knocked again and again, but no one
yet appearing, he was exceedingly surprised; for he could not think
that a castle in such repair was without inhabitants. "If there be no
one in it," said he to himself, "I have nothing to fear; and if it be
inhabited, I have wherewith to defend myself."

At last he entered, and when he came within the porch, he cried: "Is
there no one here to receive a stranger who comes in for some
refreshment as he passes by?" He repeated the same words two or three
times; but though he spoke very loud, he was not answered. The silence
increased his astonishment: he came into a spacious court, and looked on
every side for inhabitants, but discovered none.

Perceiving nobody in the court, he entered the grand halls, which were
hung with silk tapestry, the alcoves and sofas covered with stuffs of
Mecca, and the porches with the richest stuffs of India. He came
afterward into a superb saloon, in the middle of which was a fountain,
with a lion of massy gold at each angle: water issued from the mouths of
the four lions, and as it fell, formed diamonds and pearls resembling a
jet d'eau, which, springing from the middle of the fountain, rose nearly
to the top of a cupola painted in Arabesque.

The castle, on three sides, was encompassed by a garden, with parterres
of flowers and shrubbery; and to complete the beauty of the place, an
infinite number of birds filled the air with their harmonious notes, and
always remained there, nets being spread over the garden, and fastened
to the palace to confine them. The sultan walked from apartment to
apartment, where he found everything rich and magnificent. Being tired
with walking, he sat down in a veranda, which had a view over the
garden, reflecting upon what he had seen, when suddenly he heard the
voice of one complaining, in lamentable tones. He listened with
attention, and heard distinctly these words: "O fortune! thou who
wouldst not suffer me longer to enjoy a happy lot, forbear to persecute
me, and by a speedy death put an end to my sorrows. Alas! is it possible
that I am still alive, after so many torments as I have suffered!"

The sultan rose up, advanced toward the place whence he heard the voice,
and coming to the door of a great hall, opened it, and saw a handsome
young man, richly habited, seated upon a throne raised a little above
the ground. Melancholy was painted on his countenance. The sultan drew
near and saluted him; the young man returned his salutation, by an
inclination of his head, not being able to rise, at the same time
saying: "My lord, I should rise to receive you, but am hindered by sad
necessity, and therefore hope you will not be offended." "My lord,"
replied the sultan, "I am much obliged to you for having so good an
opinion of me: as to the reason of your not rising, whatever your
apology be, I heartily accept it. Being drawn hither by your complaints,
and afflicted by your grief, I come to offer you my help. I flatter
myself that you will relate to me the history of your misfortunes; but
inform me first of the meaning of the lake near the palace, where the
fish are of four colours; whose castle is this; how you came to be here;
and why you are alone."

Instead of answering these questions, the young man began to weep
bitterly. "How inconstant is fortune!" cried he; "she takes pleasure to
pull down those she has raised. Where are they who enjoy quietly the
happiness which they hold of her, and whose day is always clear and
serene?"

The sultan, moved with compassion to see him in such a condition, prayed
him to relate the cause of his excessive grief. "Alas! my lord," replied
the young man, "how is it possible but I should grieve, and my eyes be
inexhaustible fountains of tears?" At these words, lifting up his robe,
he showed the sultan that he was a man only from the head to the girdle,
and that the other half of his body was black marble.

The sultan was much surprised when he saw the deplorable condition of
the young man. "That which you show me," said he, "while it fills me
with horror, excites my curiosity, so that I am impatient to hear your
history, which, no doubt, must be extraordinary, and I am persuaded that
the lake and the fish make some part of it; therefore I conjure you to
relate it. You will find some comfort in so doing, since it is certain
that the unfortunate find relief in making known their distress." "I
will not refuse your request," replied the young man, "though I cannot
comply without renewing my grief. But I give you notice beforehand, to
prepare your ears, your mind, and even your eyes, for things which
surpass all that the imagination can conceive."




THE HISTORY OF THE YOUNG KING OF THE BLACK ISLES


"You must know, my lord," said the wretched prisoner, "that my father,
named Mahmoud, was monarch of this country. This is the kingdom of the
Black Isles, which takes its name from the four small neighbouring
mountains; for those mountains were formerly isles, and the capital
where the king, my father, resided was situated on the spot now occupied
by the lake you have seen. The sequel of my history will inform you of
the reason for those changes.

"The king, my father, died when he was seventy years of age; I had no
sooner succeeded him than I married, and the lady I chose to share the
royal dignity with me was my cousin. I had so much reason to be
satisfied with her affection, and, on my part, loved her with so much
tenderness, that nothing could surpass the harmony of our union. This
lasted five years, at the end of which time I perceived the queen ceased
to delight in my attentions.

"One day, after dinner, while she was at the bath, I found myself
inclined to repose, and lay down upon a sofa. Two of her ladies, who
were then in my chamber, came and sat down, one at my head and the other
at my feet, with fans in their hands to moderate the heat, and to
prevent the flies from disturbing me. They thought I was asleep, and
spoke in whispers; but as I only closed my eyes, I heard all their
conversation.

"One of them said to the other, 'Is not the queen wrong, not to love so
amiable a prince?' 'Certainly,' replied her companion; 'I do not
understand the reason, neither can I conceive why she goes out every
night, and leaves him alone! Is it possible that he does not perceive
it?' 'Alas!' said the first, 'how should he? She mixes every evening in
his liquor the juice of a certain herb, which makes him sleep so sound
all night that she has time to go where she pleases, and as day begins
to appear she comes and wakes him by the smell of something she puts
under his nostrils.'

"You may guess, my lord, how much I was surprised at this conversation,
and with what sentiments it inspired me; yet whatever emotion it excited
I had sufficient self-command to dissemble, and feigned to awake without
having heard a word.

"The queen returned from the bath, we supped together, and she presented
me with a cup full of such liquid as I was accustomed to drink; but
instead of putting it to my mouth, I went to a window that was open,
threw out the water so quickly that she did not perceive it, and
returned.

"Soon after, believing that I was asleep, she arose with so little
precaution, that she whispered loud enough for me to hear her
distinctly, 'Sleep on, and may you never wake again!' and so saying, she
dressed herself, and went out of the chamber.

"As soon as the queen, my wife, was gone, I arose in haste, took my
cimeter, and followed her so quickly that I soon heard the sound of her
feet before me, and then walked softly after her. She passed through
several gates, which opened upon her pronouncing some magical words, and
the last she opened was that of the garden, which she entered. I stopped
at this gate, that she might not perceive me as she passed along a
parterre; then looking after her as far as the darkness of the night
permitted, I saw her enter a little wood, whose walks were guarded by
thick palisadoes. I went thither by another way, and concealing myself,
I saw her walking there with a man.

"I did not fail to lend the most attentive ear to their discourse, and
heard her address herself thus to her gallant: 'I do not deserve,' she
said, 'to be reproached by you for want of diligence. You well know the
reason; but if all the proofs of affection I have already given you be
not sufficient to convince you of my sincerity, I am ready to give you
others more decisive: you need but command me, you know my power; I
will, if you desire it, before sunrise convert this great city, and this
superb palace, into frightful ruins, inhabited only by wolves, owls, and
ravens. If you would have me transport all the stones of those walls so
solidly built, beyond Mount Caucasus, the bounds of the habitable world,
speak but the word, and all shall be changed.'

"As the queen finished this speech she and her companion came to the end
of the walk, turned to enter another, and passed before me. I had
already drawn my cimeter, and the man being next me, I struck him on the
neck, and brought him to the ground. I concluded I had killed him, and
therefore retired speedily without making myself known to the queen,
whom I chose to spare, because she was my kinswoman.

"The wound I had given her companion was mortal; but by her enchantments
she preserved him in an existence in which he could not be said to be
either dead or alive. As I crossed the garden to return to the palace, I
heard the queen loudly lamenting, and judging by her cries how much she
was grieved, I was pleased that I had spared her life.

"As soon as I had reached my apartment, I went to bed, and being
satisfied with having punished the villain who had injured me, fell
asleep.

"Next morning I arose, went to my closet, and dressed myself. I
afterward held my council. At my return, the queen, clad in mourning,
her hair dishevelled, and part of it torn off, presented herself before
me, and said: 'I come to beg your majesty not to be surprised to see me
in this condition. My heavy affliction is occasioned by intelligence of
three distressing events which I have just received.' 'Alas! what are
they, madam?' said I. 'The death of the queen, my dear mother,' she
replied, 'that of the king, my father, killed in battle, and of one of
my brothers, who has fallen down a precipice.'

"I was not displeased that she used these pretexts to conceal the true
cause of her grief. 'Madam,' said I, 'so far from blaming, I assure you
I heartily commiserate your sorrow. I should feel surprise if you were
insensible to such heavy calamities: weep on; your tears are so many
proofs of your tenderness; but I hope that time and reflection will
moderate your grief.'

"She retired into her apartment, where, giving herself wholly up to
sorrow, she spent a whole year in mourning and lamentation. At the end
of that period, she begged permission to erect a burying-place for
herself, within the bounds of the palace, where she would continue, she
told me, to the end of her days: I consented, and she built a stately
edifice, and called it the Palace of Tears. When it was finished, she
caused the object of her care to be conveyed thither; she had hitherto
prevented his dying, by potions which she had administered to him; and
she continued to convey them to him herself every day after he came to
the Palace of Tears.

"Yet, with all her enchantments, she could not cure the wretch; he was
not only unable to walk or support himself, but had also lost the use of
his speech, and exhibited no sign of life except in his looks.

"Every day the queen made him two long visits. I was well apprised of
this, but pretended ignorance. One day my curiosity induced me to go to
the Palace of Tears, to observe how my consort employed herself, and
from a place where she could not see me, I heard her thus address the
wounded ruffian: 'I am afflicted to the highest degree to behold you in
this condition,' she cried, 'I am as sensible as yourself of the
tormenting pain you endure; but, dear soul, I am continually speaking to
you, and you do not answer me: how long will you remain silent? Speak
only one word: alas! the sweetest moments of my life are these I spend
here in partaking of your grief.'

"At these words, which were several times interrupted by her sighs, I
lost all patience: and discovering myself, came up to her, and said,
'Madam, you have wept enough, it is time to give over this sorrow, which
dishonours us both; you have too much forgotten what you owe to me and
to yourself.' 'Sire,' said she, 'if you have any kindness or compassion
for me left, I beseech you to put no restraint upon me; allow me to
indulge my grief, which it is impossible for time to assuage.'

"When I perceived that my remonstrance, instead of restoring her to a
sense of duty, served only to increase her anguish, I ceased speaking
and retired. She continued every day to visit her charge, and for two
whole years abandoned herself to grief and despair.

"I went a second time to the Palace of Tears, while she was there. I
concealed myself again, and heard her thus cry out: 'It is now three
years since you spoke one word to me; you answer not the proofs I give
you of my devotion by my sighs and lamentations. Is it from
insensibility, or contempt? O tomb! tell me by what miracle thou
becamest the depository of the rarest treasure the world ever
contained.'

"I must confess, my lord, I was enraged at these expressions; for, in
truth, this adored mortal was by no means what you would imagine him to
have been. He was a black Indian, one of the original natives of this
country. I was so enraged at the language addressed to him, that I
discovered myself, and apostrophising the tomb in my turn, I cried, 'O
tomb! why dost thou not swallow up that monster so revolting to human
nature, or rather why dost thou not swallow up this pair of monsters?'

"I had scarcely uttered these words, when the queen, who sat by the
black, rose up like a fury: 'Miscreant!' said she, 'thou art the cause
of my grief; do not think I am ignorant of this, I have dissembled too
long. It was thy barbarous hand that brought the object of my fondness
into this lamentable condition; and thou hast the cruelty to come and
insult me.' 'Yes,' said I, in a rage, 'it was I who chastised that
monster, according to his desert; I ought to have treated thee in the
same manner; I now repent that I did not; thou hast too long abused my
goodness.' As I spoke these words, I drew out my cimeter, and lifted up
my hand to punish her; but regarding me steadfastly, she said with a
jeering smile, 'Moderate thine anger.' At the same time she pronounced
words I did not understand; and afterward added, 'By virtue of my
enchantments, I command thee to become half marble and half man.'
Immediately, my lord, I became what you see, a dead man among the
living, and a living man among the dead. After this cruel sorceress,
unworthy of the name of queen, had metamorphosed me thus, and brought me
into this hall, by another enchantment she destroyed my capital, which
was very flourishing and populous; she annihilated the houses, the
public places and markets, and reduced the site of the whole to the lake
and desert plain you have seen; the fishes of four colours in the waters
are the four kinds of inhabitants, of different religions, which the
city contained. The white are the Mussulmans; the red, the Persians, who
worship fire; the blue, the Christians; and the yellow, the Jews. The
four little hills were the four islands that gave name to this kingdom.
I learned all this from the enchantress, who, to add to my affliction,
related to me these effects of her rage. But this is not all; her
revenge not being satisfied with the destruction of my dominions, and
the metamorphosis of my person, she comes every day, and gives me over
my naked shoulders a hundred lashes with a whip until I am covered with
blood. When she has finished this part of my punishment, she throws over
me a coarse stuff of goat's hair, and over that this robe of brocade,
not to honour, but to mock me."

When he came to this part of his narrative, the young king could not
restrain his tears; and the sultan was himself so affected by the
relation, that he could not find utterance for any words of consolation.
Shortly after, the young king, lifting up his eyes to heaven, exclaimed,
"Mighty creator of all things, I submit myself to Thy judgments, and to
the decrees of Thy providence: I endure my calamities with patience,
since it is Thy will that things should be as they are; but I hope that
Thy infinite goodness will ultimately reward me."

The sultan, greatly moved by the recital of this affecting story, and
anxious to avenge the sufferings of the unfortunate prince, said to him:
"Inform me whither this perfidious sorceress retires, and where may be
found the vile wretch, who is entombed before his death." "My lord,"
replied the prince, "the Indian, as I have already told you, is lodged
in the Palace of Tears, in a superb tomb constructed in the form of a
dome: this palace joins the castle on the side in which the gate is
placed. As to the queen, I cannot tell you precisely whither she
retires, but every day at sunrise she goes to visit her charge, after
having executed her bloody vengeance upon me; and you see I am not in a
condition to defend myself. She carries to him the potion with which she
has hitherto prevented his dying, and always complains of his never
having spoken to her since he was wounded."

"Prince," said the sultan, "your condition can never be sufficiently
deplored: no one can be more sensibly affected by your misfortune than I
am. Never did anything so extraordinary befall any man! One thing only
is wanting; the revenge to which you are entitled, and I will omit
nothing in my power to effect it."

In his subsequent conversation with the young prince the sultan told him
who he was, and for what purpose he had entered the castle; and
afterward informed him of a mode of revenge which he had devised. They
agreed upon the measures they were to take for accomplishing their
design, but deferred the execution of it till the following day. In the
meantime, the night being far spent, the sultan took some rest; but the
young prince passed the night as usual, without sleep, never having
slept since he was enchanted.

[Illustration]

_When he came to this part of his narrative the young king could not
restrain his tears._

Next morning the sultan arose with the dawn, and prepared to execute his
design, by proceeding to the Palace of Tears. He found it lighted up
with an infinite number of flambeaux of white wax, and perfumed by a
delicious scent issuing from several censers of fine gold of admirable
workmanship. As soon as he perceived the bed where the Indian lay, he
drew his cimeter and deprived him of his wretched life, dragged his
corpse into the court of the castle, and threw it into a well. After
this he went and lay down in the black's bed, placed his cimeter under
the covering, and waited to complete his design.

The queen arrived shortly after. She first went into the chamber of her
husband, the king of the Black Islands, stripped him, and with
unexampled barbarity gave him a hundred stripes. The unfortunate prince
filled the palace with his lamentations, and conjured her in the most
affecting tone to take pity on him; but the cruel wretch ceased not till
she had given the usual number of blows. "You had no compassion," said
she, "and you are to expect none from me."

After the enchantress had given her husband a hundred blows with the
whip, she put on again his covering of goat's hair, and his brocade gown
over all; she went afterward to the Palace of Tears, and as she entered
renewed her tears and lamentations; then approaching the bed, where she
thought the Indian lay: "Alas!" said she, addressing herself to the
sultan, conceiving him to be the black, "My sun, my life, will you
always be silent? Are you resolved to let me die without affording me
the comfort of hearing your voice?"

The sultan, as if he had awaked out of a deep sleep, and counterfeiting
the pronunciation of the blacks, answered the queen with a grave tone:
"There is no strength or power but in God alone, who is almighty." At
these words the enchantress, who did not expect them, uttered a loud
exclamation of joy. "My dear lord," cried she, "do I not deceive myself;
is it certain that I hear you, and that you speak to me?" "Unhappy
woman," said the sultan, "art thou worthy that I should answer thee?"
"Alas!" replied the queen, "why do you reproach me thus?" "The cries,"
returned the sultan, "the groans and tears of thy husband, whom thou
treatest every day with so much indignity and barbarity, prevent my
sleeping night or day. Hadst thou disenchanted him, I should long since
have been cured, and have recovered the use of my speech. This is the
cause of my silence, of which you complain." "Well," said the
enchantress, "to pacify you, I am ready to execute your commands; would
you have me restore him?" "Yes," replied the sultan; "make haste to set
him at liberty, that I be no longer disturbed by his lamentations." The
enchantress went immediately out of the Palace of Tears; she took a cup
of water, and pronounced some words over it, which caused it to boil, as
if it had been on the fire. She afterward proceeded to the young king,
and threw the water upon him, saying: "If the Creator of all things did
form thee as thou art at present, or if He be angry with thee, do not
change; but if thou art in that condition merely by virtue of my
enchantments, resume thy natural shape, and become what thou wast
before." She had scarcely spoken these words when the prince, finding
himself restored to his former condition, rose up and returned thanks to
God. The enchantress then said to him, "Get thee from this castle, and
never return on pain of death." The young king, yielding to necessity,
went away without replying a word, and retired to a remote place, where
he patiently awaited the event of the design which the sultan had so
happily begun. Meanwhile the enchantress returned to the Palace of
Tears, and supposing that she still spoke to the black, said, "Dear
love, I have done what you required; nothing now prevents your rising
and giving me the satisfaction of which I have so long been deprived."

The sultan, still counterfeiting the pronunciation of the black, said:
"What you have now done is by no means sufficient for my cure; you have
only removed a part of the evil; you must cut it up by the root." "My
lovely black," resumed the queen, "what do you mean by the root?"
"Wretched woman," replied the sultan, "understand you not that I allude
to the town and its inhabitants, and the four islands, destroyed by thy
enchantments? The fish every night at midnight raise their heads out of
the lake, and cry for vengeance against thee and me. This is the true
cause of the delay of my cure. Go speedily, restore things to their
former state, and at thy return I will give thee my hand, and thou shalt
help me to arise."

The enchantress, inspired with hope from these words, cried out in a
transport of joy, "My heart, my soul, you shall soon be restored to your
health, for I will immediately do as you command me." Accordingly she
went that instant, and when she came to the brink of the lake she took a
little water in her hand, and sprinkling it, she pronounced some words
over the fish and the lake, and the city was immediately restored. The
fish became men, women, and children; Mohammedans, Christians, Persians,
or Jews; freemen or slaves, as they were before: every one having
recovered his natural form. The houses and shops were immediately filled
with their inhabitants, who found all things as they were before the
enchantment. The sultan's numerous retinue, who found themselves
encamped in the largest square, were astonished to see themselves in an
instant in the middle of a large, handsome, well-peopled city.

To return to the enchantress: As soon as she had effected this wonderful
change, she returned with all expedition to the Palace of Tears, that
she might receive her reward. "My dear lord," cried she, as she entered,
"I have done all that you required of me, then pray rise and give me
your hand." "Come near," said the sultan, still counterfeiting the
pronunciation of the black. She did so. "You are not near enough," he
continued; "approach nearer." She obeyed. He then rose up, and seizing
her by the arm so suddenly that she had not time to discover him, he
with a blow of his cimeter cut her in two, so that one half fell one way
and the other another. This done, he left the body on the spot, and
going out of the Palace of Tears, went to seek the young king of the
Black Isles, who waited for him with great impatience. When he found
him, "Prince," said he, embracing him, "rejoice; you have now nothing to
fear; your cruel enemy is dead."

The young prince returned thanks to the sultan in a manner that
sufficiently evinced his gratitude, and in return wished him long life
and happiness. "You may henceforward," said the sultan, "dwell peaceably
in your capital, unless you will accompany me to mine, which is near:
you shall there be welcome, and have as much honour shown you as if you
were in your own kingdom." "Potent monarch, to whom I am so much
indebted," replied the king, "you think, then, that you are near your
capital." "Yes," said the sultan, "I know it is not above four or five
hours' journey." "It will take you a whole year to return," said the
prince. "I do indeed believe that you came hither from your capital in
the time you mention, because mine was enchanted; but since the
enchantment is taken off, things are changed: however, this shall not
prevent my following you, were it to the utmost corners of the earth.
You are my deliverer, and that I may give you proofs of my
acknowledgment of this during my whole life, I am willing to accompany
you, and to leave my kingdom without regret."

The sultan was extremely surprised to understand that he was so far from
his dominions, and could not imagine how it could be, but the young king
of the Black Islands convinced him beyond a possibility of doubt. Then
the sultan replied: "It is no matter; the trouble of returning to my own
country is sufficiently recompensed by the satisfaction of having
obliged you, and by acquiring you for a son; for since you will do me
the honour to accompany me, as I have no child, I look upon you as such,
and from this moment appoint you my heir and successor."

The young prince then employed himself in making preparations for his
journey, which were finished in three weeks, to the great regret of his
court and subjects, who agreed to receive at his hands one of his
nearest kindred for their monarch.

At length the sultan and the young prince began their journey, with a
hundred camels laden with inestimable riches from the treasury, followed
by fifty handsome gentlemen on horseback, perfectly well mounted and
dressed. They had a pleasant journey; and when the sultan, who had sent
couriers to give advice of his delay, and of the adventure which had
occasioned it, approached his capital, the principal officers came to
receive him, and to assure him that his long absence had occasioned no
alteration in his empire. The inhabitants also came out in great crowds,
received him with acclamations, and made public rejoicings for several
days.

The day after his arrival the sultan acquainted his courtiers with his
adoption of the king of the Four Black Islands, who was willing to leave
a great kingdom to accompany and live with him; and in reward for their
loyalty, he made each of them presents according to their rank.

As for the fisherman, as he was the first cause of the deliverance of
the young prince, the sultan gave him a plentiful fortune, which made
him and his family happy the rest of his days.




THE STORY OF GULNARE OF THE SEA


There was, in olden time, and in an ancient age and period, in the land
of the Persians, a king named Shahzeman, and the place of his residence
was Khorassan. He had not been blest, during his whole life, with a male
child nor a female; and he reflected upon this, one day, and lamented
that the greater portion of his life had passed, and he had no heir to
take the kingdom after him as he had inherited it from his fathers and
forefathers. So the utmost grief befell him on this account.

Now while he was sitting one day, one of his mamelukes came in to him,
and said to him: "O my lord, at the door is a slave-girl with a
merchant: none more beautiful than she hath been seen." And he replied:
"Bring to me the merchant and the slave-girl." The merchant and the
slave-girl therefore came to him; and when he saw her, he found her to
resemble the lance in straightness and slenderness. She was wrapped in a
garment of silk embroidered with gold, and the merchant uncovered her
face, whereupon the place was illuminated by her beauty, and there hung
down from her forehead seven locks of hair reaching to her anklets. The
King, therefore, wondered at the sight of her, and at her beauty, and
her stature and justness of form; and he said to the merchant: "O
sheikh, for how much is this damsel to be sold?" The merchant answered:
"O my lord, I purchased her for two thousand pieces of gold of the
merchant who owned her before me, and I have been for three years
travelling with her, and she hath cost, to the period of her arrival at
this place, three thousand pieces of gold; and she is a present from me
unto thee." Upon this, the king conferred upon him a magnificent robe of
honour, and gave orders to present him with ten thousand pieces of gold.
So he took them, and kissed the hands of the king, thanking him for his
beneficence, and departed. Then the king committed the damsel to the
tirewomen, saying to them: "Amend the state of this damsel, and deck
her, and furnish for her a private chamber, and take her into it." He
also gave orders to his chamberlains that everything which she required
should be conveyed to her. The seat of government where he resided was
on the shore of the sea, and his city was called the White City. And
they conducted the damsel into a private chamber, which chamber had
windows overlooking the sea; and the king commanded his chamberlains to
close all the doors upon her after taking to her all that she required.

The king then went in to visit the damsel; but she rose not to him, nor
took any notice of him. So the king said: "It seemeth that she hath been
with people who have not taught her good manners." And looking at the
damsel, he saw her to be a person surpassing in loveliness, her face was
like the disk of the moon at the full, or the shining sun in the clear
sky; and he wondered at her beauty, extolling the perfection of God, the
Creator: then the king advanced to the damsel, and seated himself by her
side, pressed her to his bosom, and kissed her lips, which he found to
be sweeter than honey. After this, he gave orders to bring tables of the
richest viands, comprising dishes of every kind; and he ate, and put
morsels into her mouth until she was satisfied; but she spoke not a
single word. The king talked to her, and inquired of her her name; but
she was silent, not uttering a word, nor returning him an answer,
ceasing not to hang down her head toward the ground; and what protected
her from the anger of the king was her beauty, and her tenderness of
manner. So the king said within himself: "Extolled be the perfection of
God, the Creator of this damsel! How elegant is she, saving that she
doth not speak!"--Then the king asked the female slaves whether she had
spoken; and they answered him: "From the time of her arrival to the
present moment she hath not spoken one word, and we have not heard her
talk." The king therefore caused some of them to come, and sing to her,
and make merry with her, thinking that then she might perhaps speak.
Accordingly the female slaves played before her with all kinds of
musical instruments, and enacted sports and other performances, and they
sang so that every one who was present was moved with delight, except
the damsel, who looked at them and was silent, neither laughing nor
speaking. So the heart of the king was contracted. He however inclined
to her entirely, paying no regard to others, but relinquishing all the
rest of his favourites.

He remained with her a whole year, which seemed as one day, and still
she spoke not; and he said to her one day, when his passion was
excessive: "O desire of souls, verily the love that I have for thee is
great, and I have relinquished for thy sake all my worldly portion, and
been patient with thee a whole year. I beg God that He will, in His
grace, soften thy heart toward me, and that thou mayest speak to me. Or,
if thou be dumb, inform me by a sign, that I may give up hope of thy
speaking. I also beg of God that He will bless thee with a son that may
inherit my kingdom after me; for I am solitary, having none to be my
heir, and my age hath become great. I conjure thee, then, by Allah, if
thou love me, that thou return me a reply." And upon this, the damsel
hung her head toward the ground, meditating. Then she raised her head,
and smiled in the face of the king, whereat it appeared to the king that
lightning filled the private chamber; and she said: "O magnanimous King,
God hath answered thy prayer; for I am about to bring thee a child, and
the time is almost come. And were it not that I knew this thing, I had
not spoken to thee one word." And when the king heard what she said, his
face brightened up with happiness, and he kissed her hands by reason of
the violence of his joy, and said: "Praise be to God who hath favoured
me with things that I desired; the first, thy speaking; and the second,
thy information that thou art about to bring me a child." Then the king
arose and went forth from her, and seated himself upon the throne of his
kingdom in a state of exceeding happiness; and he ordered the vizier to
give out to the poor and the needy a hundred thousand pieces of gold as
a thank-offering to God. So the vizier did as the king had commanded
him. And after that, the king went in to the damsel, and embraced her,
saying to her: "O my mistress, wherefore hath been this silence, seeing
that thou hast been with me a whole year, awake and asleep, yet hast not
spoken to me, except on this day?"

The damsel answered: "Hear, O King of the age, and know that I am a poor
person, a stranger, broken-hearted: I have become separated from my
mother, and my family, and my brother." And when the king heard her
words, he knew her desire, and he replied: "As to thy saying that thou
art poor, there is no occasion for such an assertion; for all my kingdom
and possessions are at thy service, and as to thy saying, 'I have become
separated from my mother and my family and my brother'--inform me in
what place they are, and I will send to them, and bring them to thee."
So she said to him: "Know, O King, that my name is Gulnare (_Pomegranate
Flower_) of the Sea. My father was one of the Kings of the Sea, and he
died, and left to us the kingdom; but while we were enjoying it, another
of the kings came upon us, and took the kingdom from our hands. I have
also a brother named Saleh, and my mother is of the women of the sea;
and I quarrelled with my brother, and swore that I would throw myself
into the hands of a man of the inhabitants of the land. Accordingly I
came forth from the sea, and sat upon the shore of an island in the
moonlight, and there passed by a man who took me and sold me to this man
from whom thou tookest me, and he was an excellent, virtuous man, a
person of religion and fidelity and kindness. But had not thy heart
loved me, and hadst thou not preferred me above all thy wives, I had not
remained with thee one hour; for I should have cast myself into the sea
from this window, and gone to my mother and my people. I was ashamed,
however, to go to them; for they would imagine evil of me, and would not
believe me, even though I should swear to them, were I to tell them that
a king had purchased me with his money, and chosen me in preference to
his other wives and all that his right hand possessed. This is my story,
and peace be on thee!" And when he heard her words, he thanked her, and
kissed her between the eyes, and said to her: "By Allah, O my mistress,
and light of my eyes, I cannot endure separation from thee for one hour;
and if thou quit me, I shall die instantly. How then shall the affair
be?" She answered: "O my master, the time of the birth is near, and my
family must come." "And how," said the king, "do they walk in the sea
without being wetted?" She answered: "We walk in the sea as ye walk upon
the land, through the influence of the names engraved upon the seal of
Solomon, the son of David, upon both of whom be peace! But, O King,
when my family and my brethren come, I will inform them that thou
boughtest me with thy money, and hast treated me with beneficence, and
it will be meet that thou confirm my assertion to them. They will also
see thy state with their eyes, and will know that thou art a king, the
son of a king." And thereupon the king said: "O my mistress, do what
seemeth fit to thee, and what thou wishest; for I will comply with thy
desire in all that thou wilt do." And the damsel said: "Know, O King of
the age, that we walk in the sea with our eyes open, and see what is in
it, and we see the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and the sky as on
the face of the earth, and this hurteth us not. Know also, that in the
sea are many peoples and various forms of all the kinds that are on the
land; and know, moreover, that all that is on the land, in comparison
with what is in the sea, is a very small matter." And the king wondered
at her words.

Then the damsel took a bit of aloes-wood and, having lighted a fire in a
perfuming-vessel, threw into it that bit, and she proceeded to speak
words which no one understood; whereupon a great smoke arose, while the
king looked on. After this, she said to the king: "O my lord, arise and
conceal thyself in a closet, that I may shew thee my brother and my
mother and my family without their seeing thee; for I desire to bring
them, and thou shalt see in this place, at this time, a wonder, and
shalt marvel at the various shapes and strange forms that God hath
created." So the king arose immediately, and entered a closet, and
looked to see what she would do. And she proceeded to burn perfume and
repeat spells until the sea foamed and was agitated, and there came
forth from it a young man of comely form, of beautiful countenance, like
the moon at the full, with shining forehead, and red cheeks, and hair
resembling pearls and jewels; he was, of all the creation, the most
like to his sister, and the tongue of the case itself seemed to recite
in his praise these verses:--

   The moon becometh perfect once in each month; but the loveliness of thy
     face is perfect every day.
   Its abode is in the heart of one sign at a time; but thine abode is in
     all hearts at once.

[Illustration]

_And she proceeded to burn perfume and repeat spells until the sea
foamed and was agitated._

Afterward, there came forth from the sea a grizzly-haired old woman, and
with her five damsels, resembling moons and bearing a likeness to the
damsel whose name was Gulnare. Then the king saw the young man and the
old woman and the damsels walk upon the surface of the water until they
came to Gulnare; and when they drew near to the window, and she beheld
them, she rose to them and met them with joy. On their seeing her, they
knew her, and they went in to her and embraced her, weeping violently;
and they said to her: "O Gulnare, how is it that thou leavest us for
four years, and we know not the place in which thou art? By Allah, we
had no delight in food nor in drink a single day, weeping night and day
on account of the excess of our longing to see thee." Then the damsel
began to kiss the hand of her brother, and the hand of her mother, and
so also the hands of the daughters of her uncle, and they sat with her
awhile, asking her respecting her state, and the things that had
happened to her, and her present condition.

So she said to them: "Know ye, that when I quitted you, and came forth
from the sea, I sat upon the shore of an island, and a man took me, and
sold me to a merchant, and the merchant brought me to this city, and
sold me to its king for ten thousand pieces of gold. Then he treated me
with attention, and forsook all his favourites for my sake, and was
diverted by his regard for me from everything that he possessed and what
was in his city." And when her brother heard her words, he said:
"Praise be to God who hath reunited us! But it is my desire, O my
sister, that thou wouldst arise and go with us to our country and our
family." So when the king heard the words of her brother, his reason
fled in consequence of his fear lest the damsel should accept the
proposal of her kindred, and he could not prevent her, though he was
inflamed with love of her; wherefore he became perplexed in violent fear
of her separation. But as to the damsel Gulnare, on hearing the words of
her brother she said: "By Allah, O my brother, the man who purchased me
is the king of this city, and he is a great king, and a man of wisdom,
generous, of the utmost liberality. He hath treated me with honour, and
he is a person of kindness, and of great wealth, but hath no male child
nor a female. He hath shewn me favour too, and acted well to me in every
respect; and from the day when I came to him to the present time, I have
not heard from him a word to grieve my heart; but he hath not ceased to
treat me with courtesy, and I am living with him in the most perfect of
enjoyments. Moreover, if I quitted him, he would perish: for he can
never endure my separation even for a single hour. I also, if I quitted
him, should die of my love for him in consequence of his kindness to me
during the period of my residence with him; for if my father were
living, my condition with him would not be like my condition with this
great, glorious king. God (whose name be exalted!) afflicted me not, but
compensated me well; and as the king hath not a male child nor a female,
I beg God to bless me with a son that may inherit of this great king
these palaces and possessions." And when her brother, and the daughters
of her uncle, heard her words, their eyes became cheerful thereat, and
they said to her: "O Gulnare, thou art acquainted with our affection for
thee, and thou art assured that thou art the dearest of all persons to
us, and art certain that we desire for thee comfort, without trouble or
toil. Therefore if thou be not in a state of comfort, arise and
accompany us to our country and our family; but if thou be comfortable
here, in honour and happiness, this is our desire and wish." And Gulnare
replied: "By Allah, I am in a state of the utmost enjoyment, in honour
and desirable happiness." So when the king heard these words from her,
he rejoiced, and he thanked her for them; his love for her penetrated to
his heart's core, and he knew that she loved him as he loved her, and
that she desired to remain with him to see his child which she was to
bring to him.

Then the damsel Gulnare of the Sea gave orders to the female slaves to
bring forward viands of all kinds; and Gulnare herself was the person
who superintended the preparation of the viands in the kitchen. So the
female slaves brought to them the viands, and the sweetmeats, and the
fruits; and she ate with her family. But afterward they said to her: "O
Gulnare, thy master is a man who is a stranger to us, and we have
entered his abode without his permission, and thou praisest to us his
excellence, and hast also brought to us his food, and we have eaten, but
have not seen him, nor hath he seen us, nor come into our presence, nor
eaten with us, that the bond of bread and salt might be established
between us." And they all desisted from eating, and were enraged at her,
and fire began to issue from their mouths as from cressets. So when the
king beheld this, his reason fled, in consequence of the violence of his
fear of them. Then Gulnare rose to them, and soothed their hearts; after
which she walked along until she entered the closet in which was the
king her master; and she said to him: "O my master, didst thou see, and
didst thou hear my thanks to thee, and my praise of thee in the presence
of my family; and didst thou hear what they said to me, that they
desired to take me with them to our family and our country?" The king
answered her: "I heard and saw. May God recompense thee! By Allah, I
knew not the extent of the love that thou feelest for me until this
blessed hour." She replied: "O my master, is the recompense of
beneficence aught but beneficence? How then could my heart be happy to
quit thee, and to depart from thee? Now I desire of thy goodness that
thou come and salute my family, that they may see thee, and that
pleasure and mutual friendship may ensue. For know, O King, that my
brother and my mother and the daughters of my uncle have conceived a
great love for thee in consequence of my praising thee to them, and they
have said, 'We will not depart from thee to our country until we have an
interview with the king, and salute him.'" And the king said to her: "I
hear and obey; for this is what I desire." He then rose from his place,
and went to them, and saluted them with the best salutation; and they
hastened to rise to him; they met him in the most polite manner, and he
sat with them in the pavilion, ate with them at the table, and remained
with them for a period of thirty days. Then they desired to return to
their country and abode. So they took leave of the king and Queen
Gulnare of the Sea, and departed from them, after the king had treated
them with the utmost honour.

After this, Gulnare gave birth to a boy, resembling the moon at the
full, whereat the king experienced the utmost happiness, because he had
not before been blessed with a son nor a daughter during his life. They
continued the rejoicings, and the decoration of the city, for a period
of seven days, in the utmost happiness and enjoyment; and on the seventh
day, the mother of Gulnare, and her brother, and the daughters of her
uncle, all came, when they knew that she had given birth to her child.
The king met them, rejoicing at their arrival, and said to them: "I said
that I would not name my son until ye should come, and that ye should
name him according to your knowledge." And they named him Bedr Basim
(_Smiling Full Moon_), all of them agreeing as to this name. They then
presented the boy to his maternal uncle, Saleh, who took him upon his
hands, and, rising with him from among them, walked about the palace to
the right and left; after which he went forth with him from the palace,
descended with him to the sea, and walked on until he became concealed
from the eye of the king. So when the king saw that he had taken his
son, and disappeared from him at the bottom of the sea, he despaired of
him, and began to weep and wail. But Gulnare, seeing him in this state,
said to him, "O King of the age, fear not nor grieve for thy son; for I
love my child more than thou, and my child is with my brother; therefore
fear not his being drowned. If my brother knew that any injury would
betide the little one, he had not done what he hath done; and presently
he will bring thee thy son safe, if it be the will of God, whose name be
exalted!" And but a short time had elapsed when the sea was agitated,
and the uncle of the little one came forth from it, having with him the
king's son safe, and he flew from the sea until he came to them, with
the little one in his arms, silent, and his face resembling the moon in
the night of its fulness. Then the uncle of the little one looked toward
the king, and said to him: "Perhaps thou fearedst some injury to thy son
when I descended into the sea, having him with me." So he replied: "Yes,
O my master, I feared for him, and I did not imagine that he would ever
come forth from it safe." And Saleh said to him: "O King of the Land, we
applied to his eyes a lotion that we know, and repeated over him the
names engraved upon the seal of Solomon, the son of David; for when a
child is born among us, we do to him as I have told thee. Fear not
therefore, on his account, drowning, nor suffocation, nor all the seas
if he descend into them. Like as ye walk upon the land, we walk in the
sea."

He then took forth from his pocket a case, written upon, and sealed; and
he broke its seal, and scattered its contents, whereupon there fell from
it strung jewels, consisting of all kinds of jacinths and other gems,
together with three hundred oblong emeralds, and three hundred oblong
large jewels, of the size of the eggs of the ostrich, the light of which
was more resplendent than the light of the sun and the moon. And he
said: "O King of the age, these jewels and jacinths are a present from
me unto thee; for we never brought thee a present, because we knew not
the place of Gulnare's abode. So when we saw thee to have become united
to her, and that we all had become one, we brought thee this present;
and after every period of a few days, we will bring thee the like of it.
For these jewels and jacinths with us are more plentiful than the gravel
upon the land, and we know the excellent among them, and the bad, and
the places where they are found, and they are easy of access to
us."--And when the king looked at those jewels, his reason was
confounded and his mind was bewildered, and he said: "By Allah, one of
these jewels is worth my kingdom!" Then the king thanked Saleh of the
Sea for his generosity, and looking toward the Queen Gulnare said to
her: "I am abashed at thy brother; for he hath shewn favour to me, and
presented me with this magnificent present, which the people of the
earth would fail to procure." So Gulnare thanked her brother for that
which he had done; but her brother said: "O King of the age, to thank
thee hath been incumbent on us; for thou hast treated my sister with
beneficence, and we have entered thine abode, and eaten of thy
provision." Then Saleh said: "If we stood serving thee, O King of the
age, a thousand years, regarding nothing else, we could not requite
thee, and our doing so would be but a small thing in comparison with thy
desert." And Saleh remained with the king, he and his mother and the
daughters of his uncle, forty days; after which he arose and kissed the
ground before the king, the husband of his sister. So the king said to
him: "What dost thou desire, O Saleh?" And he answered: "O King of the
age, we desire of thy goodness that thou wouldst give us permission to
depart; for we have become desirous of seeing again our family and our
country and our relations and our homes. We will not, however,
relinquish the service of thee, nor that of my sister nor the son of my
sister; and by Allah, O King of the age, to quit you is not pleasant to
my heart; but how can we act, when we have been reared in the sea, and
the land is not agreeable to us?" So when the king heard his words, he
rose upon his feet, and bade farewell to Saleh of the Sea and his mother
and the daughters of his uncle, and they wept together on account of the
separation. Then they said to the king: "We will never relinquish you,
but after every period of a few days we will visit you." And after this,
they flew toward the sea, and descended into it, and disappeared.

The king treated Gulnare with beneficence, and honoured her exceedingly,
and the little one grew up well; and his maternal uncle, with his
grandmother and the daughters of his uncle, after every period of a few
days used to come to the residence of the king, and to remain with him a
month, and then return to their places. The boy ceased not to increase
in beauty and loveliness until his age became fifteen years; and he was
incomparable in his perfect beauty, and his stature and his justness of
form. He had learned writing and reading, and history and grammar and
philology, and archery; and he learned to play with the spear; and he
also learned horsemanship, and all that the sons of the kings required.
There was not one of the children of the inhabitants of the city, men
and women, that talked not of the charms of that young man; for he was
of surpassing loveliness and perfection; and the king loved him greatly.
Then the king summoned the vizier and the emeers, and the lords of the
empire, and the great men of the kingdom, and made them swear by binding
oaths that they would make Bedr Basim king over them after his father;
so they swore to him by binding oaths, and rejoiced thereat; and the
king himself was beneficent to the people, courteous in speech and of
auspicious aspect. And on the following day, the king mounted, together
with the lords of the empire and all the emeers, and all the soldiers,
and they ceased not to proceed until they arrived at the vestibule of
the palace; the king's son riding. Thereupon he alighted, and his father
embraced him, he and the emeers, and they seated him upon the throne of
the kingdom, while his father stood, as also did the emeers, before him.
Then Bedr Basim judged the people, displaced the tyrannical and invested
the just, and continued to give judgment until near midday, when he rose
from the throne of the kingdom, and went in to his mother, Gulnare of
the Sea, having upon his head the crown, and resembling the moon. So
when his mother saw him, and the king before him, she rose to him and
kissed him, and congratulated him on his elevation to the dignity of
sultan; and she offered up a prayer in favour of him and his father for
length of life, and victory over their enemies. He then sat with his
mother and rested; and when the time of afternoon-prayers arrived, he
rode with the emeers before him until he came to the horse-course, where
he played with arms till the time of nightfall, together with his
father and the lords of his empire; after which he returned to the
palace, with all the people before him. Every day he used to ride to the
horse-course; and when he returned, he sat to judge the people, and
administered justice between the emeer and the poor man. He ceased not
to do thus for a whole year; and after that, he used to ride to the
chase, and go about through the cities and provinces that were under his
rule making proclamation of safety and security, and doing as do the
kings; and he was incomparable among the people of his age in glory and
courage, and in justice to the people.

Now it came to pass that the old king, the father of Bedr Basim, fell
sick one day, whereupon his heart throbbed, and he felt that he was
about to be removed to the mansion of eternity. Then his malady
increased so that he was at the point of death. He therefore summoned
his son, and charged him to take care of his subjects and his mother and
all the lords of his empire and all the dependants. He also made them
swear, and covenanted with them a second time, that they would obey his
son; and he confided in their oaths. And after this he remained a few
days, and was admitted to the mercy of God, whose name be exalted! His
son Bedr Basim, and his wife Gulnare and the emeers and viziers and the
lords of the empire, mourned over him; and they made for him a tomb, and
buried him in it, and continued the ceremonies of mourning for him a
whole month. Saleh, the brother of Gulnare, and her mother, and the
daughters of her uncle, also came, and consoled them for the loss of the
king; and they said: "O Gulnare, if the king hath died, he hath left
this ingenuous youth, and he who hath left such as he is hath not died.
This is he who hath not an equal, the crushing lion, and the splendid
moon." Then the lords of the empire, and the grandees, went in to the
King Bedr Basim, and said to him: "O King, there is no harm in mourning
for the king; but mourning becometh not any save women; therefore
trouble not thy heart and ours by mourning for thy father; for he hath
died and left thee, and he who hath left such as thou art hath not
died." They proceeded to address him with soft words, and to console
him, and after that they conducted him into the bath; and when he came
forth from the bath, he put on a magnificent suit woven of gold, adorned
with jewels and jacinths, and he put the royal crown upon his head,
seated himself upon the throne of his kingdom, and performed the affairs
of the people, deciding equitably between the strong and the weak, and
exacting for the poor man his due from the emeer; wherefore the people
loved him exceedingly. Thus he continued to do for the space of a whole
year; and after every short period, his family of the sea visited him;
so his life was pleasant, and his eye was cheerful: and he ceased not to
live in this state until he was visited by the terminator of delights
and the separator of companions. This is the end of their story. The
mercy of God be on them all!




THE STORY OF ALADDIN; OR, THE WONDERFUL LAMP


In the capital of one of the large and rich provinces of the kingdom of
China there lived a tailor, named Mustapha, who was so poor that he
could hardly, by his daily labour, maintain himself and his family,
which consisted of a wife and son.

His son, who was called Aladdin, had been brought up in a very careless
and idle manner, and by that means had contracted many vicious habits.
He was obstinate, and disobedient to his father and mother, who, when he
grew up, could not keep him within doors. He was in the habit of going
out early in the morning, and would stay out all day, playing in the
streets with idle children of his own age.

When he was old enough to learn a trade, his father, not being able to
put him out to any other, took him into his own shop, and taught him how
to use his needle: but neither fair words nor the fear of chastisement
were capable of fixing his lively genius. All his father's endeavours to
keep him to his work were in vain; for no sooner was his back turned,
than he was gone for that day. Mustapha chastised him, but Aladdin was
incorrigible, and his father, to his great grief, was forced to abandon
him to his idleness: and was so much troubled at not being able to
reclaim him, that it threw him into a fit of sickness, of which he died
in a few months.

The mother, finding that her son would not follow his father's business,
shut up the shop, sold off the implements of trade, and with the money
she received for them, and what she could get by spinning cotton,
thought to maintain herself and her son.

Aladdin, who was now no longer restrained by the fear of a father, and
who cared so little for his mother that whenever she chid him he would
abuse her, gave himself entirely over to his idle habits, and was never
out of the streets from his companions. This course he followed till he
was fifteen years old, without giving his mind to any useful pursuit, or
the least reflection on what would become of him. In this situation, as
he was one day playing with his vagabond associates, a stranger passing
by stood to observe him.

This stranger was a sorcerer, called the African magician; as he was a
native of Africa, and had been but two days arrived from thence.

The African magician, who was a good physiognomist, observing in
Aladdin's countenance something absolutely necessary for the execution
of the design he was engaged in, inquired artfully about his family, who
he was, and what were his inclinations; and when he had learned all he
desired to know, went up to him, and taking him aside from his comrades,
said: "Child, was not your father called Mustapha, the tailor?" "Yes,
sir," answered the boy; "but he has been dead a long time."

At these words, the African magician threw his arms about Aladdin's
neck, and kissed him several times with tears in his eyes. Aladdin, who
observed his tears, asked him what made him weep. "Alas! my son," cried
the African magician with a sigh, "how can I forbear? I am your uncle;
your worthy father was my own brother. I have been many years abroad,
and now I am come home with the hopes of seeing him, you tell me he is
dead. But it is some relief to my affliction, that I knew you at first
sight, you are so like him." Then he asked Aladdin, putting his hand
into his purse, where his mother lived, and as soon as he had informed
him, gave him a handful of small money, saying: "Go, my son, to your
mother, give my love to her, and tell her that I will visit her
to-morrow, that I may have the satisfaction of seeing where my good
brother lived so long."

As soon as the African magician left his newly-adopted nephew, Aladdin
ran to his mother, overjoyed at the money his uncle had given him.
"Mother," said he, "have I an uncle?" "No, child," replied his mother,
"you have no uncle by your father's side, or mine." "I am just now
come," said Aladdin, "from a man who says he is my uncle on my father's
side. He cried and kissed me when I told him my father was dead; and to
show you that what I tell you is truth," added he, pulling out the
money, "see what he has given me; he charged me to give his love to you,
and to tell you that to-morrow he will come and pay you a visit, that he
may see the house my father lived and died in." "Indeed, child," replied
the mother, "your father had a brother, but he has been dead a long
time, and I never heard of another."

The mother and son talked no more then of the African magician; but the
next day Aladdin's uncle found him playing in another part of the town
with other youths, and embracing him as before, put two pieces of gold
into his hand, and said to him: "Carry this, child, to your mother, tell
her that I will come and see her to-night, and bid her get us something
for supper; but first show me the house where you live."

After Aladdin had showed the African magician the house, he carried the
two pieces of gold to his mother, and when he had told her of his
uncle's intention, she went out and bought provisions. She spent the
whole day in preparing the supper; and at night, when it was ready, said
to her son: "Perhaps your uncle knows not how to find our house; go and
bring him if you meet with him."

Though Aladdin had showed the magician the house, he was ready to go,
when somebody knocked at the door, which he immediately opened; and the
magician came in loaded with wine, and all sorts of fruits, which he
brought for a dessert.

After the African magician had given what he brought into Aladdin's
hands, he saluted his mother, and desired her to shew him the place
where his brother Mustapha used to sit on the sofa; and when she had so
done, he fell down and kissed it several times, crying out with tears in
his eyes: "My poor brother! how unhappy am I, not to have come soon
enough to give you one last embrace." Aladdin's mother desired him to
sit down in the same place, but he declined. "No," said he, "but give me
leave to sit opposite, that although I am deprived of the satisfaction
of seeing one so dear to me, I may at least have the pleasure of
beholding the place where he used to sit."

When the magician had sat down, he began to enter into discourse with
Aladdin's mother: "My good sister," said he, "do not be surprised at
your never having seen me all the time you were married to my brother
Mustapha. I have been forty years absent from this country, which is my
native place, as well as my late brother's; and during that time have
travelled into the Indies, Persia, Arabia, Syria, and Egypt; have
resided in the finest towns of those countries; and afterward crossed
over into Africa, where I made a longer stay. At last, as it is natural
for a man to remember his native country, I was desirous to see mine
again, and to embrace my dear brother; and finding I had strength enough
to undertake so long a journey, I immediately made the necessary
preparations, and set out. I will not tell you the length of time it
took me, all the obstacles I met with, and what fatigues I have endured
to come hither; but nothing ever afflicted me so much, as hearing of my
brother's death. I observed his features in the face of my nephew, your
son, and distinguished him among a number of lads with whom he was at
play; he can tell you how I received the most melancholy news that ever
reached my ears. But God be praised for all things! it is a comfort for
me to find, as it were, my brother in a son, who has his most remarkable
features."

The African magician, perceiving that the widow began to weep at the
remembrance of her husband, changed the conversation, and turning toward
her son, asked him his name. "I am called Aladdin," said he. "Well,
Aladdin," replied the magician, "what business do you follow? Are you of
any trade?"

At this question the youth hung down his head, and was not a little
abashed when his mother answered: "Aladdin is an idle fellow; his
father, when alive, strove all he could to teach him his trade, but
could not succeed; and since his death he does nothing but idle away his
time in the streets, as you saw him, without considering he is no longer
a child; and if you do not make him ashamed of it, I despair of his ever
coming to any good. He knows that his father left him no fortune, and
sees me endeavour to get bread by spinning cotton; for my part, I am
resolved one of these days to turn him out of doors, and let him provide
for himself."

After these words, Aladdin's mother burst into tears; and the magician
said: "This is not well, nephew; you must think of getting your
livelihood. There are many sorts of trades, consider if you have not an
inclination to some of them; perhaps you did not like your father's and
would prefer another; come, do not disguise your sentiments from me; I
will endeavour to help you." But finding that Aladdin returned no
answer, "If you have no mind," continued he, "to learn any handicraft, I
will take a shop for you, furnish it with all sorts of fine stuffs and
linens; and with the money you make of them lay in fresh goods, and then
you will live in an honourable way. Consult your inclination, and tell
me freely what you think of my proposal."

This plan greatly flattered Aladdin, who hated work but had sense enough
to know that such shops were much frequented and the owners respected.
He told the magician he had a greater inclination to that business than
to any other, and that he should be much obliged to him for his
kindness. "Since this profession is agreeable to you," said the African
magician, "I will carry you with me to-morrow, clothe you as handsomely
as the best merchants in the city, and afterward we will think of
opening a shop as I mentioned."

The widow, who never till then could believe that the magician was her
husband's brother, no longer doubted after his promises of kindness to
her son. She thanked him for his good intentions; and after having
exhorted Aladdin to render himself worthy of his uncle's favour by good
behaviour, served up supper, at which they talked of several indifferent
matters; and then the magician, who saw that the night was pretty far
advanced, took his leave, and retired.

He came again the next day, as he had promised, and took Aladdin with
him to a merchant, who sold all sorts of clothes for different ages and
ranks ready made, and a variety of fine stuffs. He asked to see some
that suited Aladdin in size; and Aladdin, charmed with the liberality of
his new uncle, made choice of one, and the magician immediately paid for
it.

When the boy found himself so handsomely equipped, he returned his uncle
thanks; who promised never to forsake him, but always to take him along
with him; which he did to the most frequented places in the city, and
particularly where the principal merchants kept their shops. When he
brought him into the street where they sold the richest stuffs and
finest linens, he said to Aladdin: "As you are soon to be a merchant, it
is proper you should frequent these shops, and be acquainted with them."
He then showed him the largest and finest mosques, carried him to the
khans or inns where the merchants and travellers lodged, and afterward
to the sultan's palace, where he had free access; and at last brought
him to his own khan, where, meeting with some merchants he had become
acquainted with since his arrival, he gave them a treat, to bring them
and his pretended nephew acquainted.

This entertainment lasted till night, when Aladdin would have taken
leave of his uncle to go home, but the magician would not let him go by
himself, but conducted him to his mother, who, as soon as she saw him so
well dressed, was transported with joy, and bestowed a thousand
blessings upon the magician, for being at so great an expense for her
child. "Generous relation!" said she, "I know not how to thank you for
your liberality! I wish you may live long enough to witness my son's
gratitude, which he cannot better shew than by regulating his conduct by
your good advice."

"Aladdin," replied the magician, "is a good boy, and I believe we shall
do very well; but I am sorry for one thing, which is, that I cannot
perform to-morrow what I promised, because, as it is Friday, the shops
will be shut up, and therefore we cannot hire or furnish one till
Saturday. I will, however, call on him to-morrow and take him to walk in
the gardens, where people of the best fashion generally resort. Perhaps
he has never seen these amusements, he has only hitherto been among
children; but now he must see men." The African magician then took his
leave of the mother and the son, and retired.

Aladdin rose early the next morning, dressed himself to be ready, and
after he had waited some time began to be impatient and stood watching
at the door; but as soon as he perceived his uncle coming, he told his
mother, took his leave of her, and ran to meet him.

The magician caressed Aladdin, and said: "Come, my dear child, and I
will shew you fine things." He then led him out at one of the gates of
the city, to some magnificent palaces, to each of which belonged
beautiful gardens, into which anybody might enter. At every building he
came to, he asked Aladdin if he did not think it fine; and the youth was
ready to answer when any one presented itself, crying out: "Here is a
finer house, uncle, than any we have seen yet." By this artifice, the
cunning magician led Aladdin some way into the country; and as he meant
to carry him farther, pretending to be tired, he took an opportunity to
sit down in one of the gardens on the brink of a fountain of clear
water, which discharged itself by a lion's mouth of bronze into a basin:
"Come, nephew," said he, "you must be weary as well as I; let us rest
ourselves, and we shall be better able to pursue our walk."

After they had sat down, the magician pulled from his girdle a
handkerchief with cakes and fruit, which he had provided, and laid them
on the edge of the basin. He broke a cake in two, gave one half to
Aladdin and ate the other himself; and in regard to the fruit, left him
at liberty to take which sort he liked best. During this short repast,
he exhorted his nephew to leave off keeping company with vagabonds, and
seek that of wise and prudent men, to improve by their conversation;
"For," said he, "you will soon be at man's estate, and you cannot too
early begin to imitate their example." When they had eaten as much as
they liked, they pursued their walk through gardens separated from one
another only by small ditches, which marked out the limits without
interrupting the communication; so great was the confidence the
inhabitants reposed in each other. By this means, the African magician
drew Aladdin insensibly beyond the gardens, and crossed the country,
till they nearly reached the mountains.

Aladdin, who had never been so far before, began to find himself much
tired, and said to the magician: "Where are we going, uncle? We have
left the gardens a great way behind us, and I see nothing but mountains;
if we go much farther, I do not know whether I shall be able to reach
the town again!" "Never fear, nephew," said the false uncle; "I will
shew you another garden which surpasses all we have yet seen; and when
we come there, you will say that you would have been sorry to have been
so nigh, and not seen it." Aladdin was soon persuaded; and the magician,
to make the way seem shorter and less fatiguing, told him a great many
stories.

At last they arrived between two mountains of moderate height, and equal
size, divided by a narrow valley, which was the place where the magician
intended to execute the design that had brought him from Africa to
China. "We will go no farther now," said he to Aladdin: "I will shew you
here some extraordinary things, which, when you have seen, you will
thank me for: but while I strike a light, gather up all the loose dry
sticks you can see, to kindle a fire with."

Aladdin collected a great heap and the magician presently set them on
fire, and when they were in a blaze, threw in some incense which raised
a cloud of smoke. This he dispersed on each side, by pronouncing several
magical words which the lad did not understand.

At the same time the earth, trembling, opened just before the magician,
and uncovered a stone, laid horizontally, with a brass ring fixed into
the middle. Aladdin was so frightened at what he saw, that he would have
run away; but the magician caught hold of him, abused him, and gave him
such a box on the ear that he knocked him down. Aladdin got up
trembling, and with tears in his eyes, said to the magician: "What have
I done, uncle, to be treated in this severe manner?" "I have my
reasons," answered the magician; "I am your uncle, I supply the place of
your father, and you ought to make no reply. But, child," added he,
softening, "do not be afraid; for I shall not ask anything of you, but
that you obey me punctually, if you would reap the advantages which I
intend you." These fair promises calmed Aladdin's fears and resentment;
and when the magician saw that he was appeased, he said to him: "You see
what I have done by virtue of my incense, and the words I pronounced.
Know then, that under this stone there is hidden a treasure, destined to
be yours, and which will make you richer than the greatest monarch in
the world: no person but yourself is permitted to lift this stone, or
enter the cave; so you must punctually execute what I may command, for
it is a matter of great consequence both to you and me."

Aladdin, amazed at all he saw and heard the magician say of the treasure
which was to make him happy forevermore, forgot what was past, and
rising, said: "Well, uncle, what is to be done? Command me, I am ready
to obey." "I am overjoyed, child," said the African magician, embracing
him; "take hold of the ring, and lift up that stone." "Indeed, uncle,"
replied Aladdin, "I am not strong enough; you must help me." "You have
no occasion for my assistance," answered the magician; "if I help you,
we shall be able to do nothing; take hold of the ring, pronounce
the names of your father and grandfather, then lift it up, and you will
find it will come easily." Aladdin did as the magician bade him, raised
the stone with ease, and laid it on one side.

[Illustration]

_At the same time the earth, trembling, opened just before the magician,
and uncovered a stone, laid horizontally, with a brass ring fixed into
the middle._

When the stone was pulled up, there appeared a cavity of about three or
four feet deep, with a little door, and steps to go down lower.
"Observe, my son," said the African magician, "what I direct. Descend
into the cave, and when you are at the bottom of those steps you will
find a door which will lead you into a spacious vault, divided into
three great halls, in each of which you will see four large brass
cisterns placed on each side, full of gold and silver; but take care you
do not meddle with them. Before you enter the first hall, be sure to
tuck up your vest, wrap it about you, and then pass through the second
into the third without stopping. Above all, have a care that you do not
touch the walls; for if you do, you will die instantly. At the end of
the third hall, you will find a door which opens into a garden planted
with fine trees loaded with fruit; walk directly across the garden by a
path which will lead you to five steps that will bring you upon a
terrace, where you will see a niche before you, and in that niche a
lighted lamp. Take the lamp down, and extinguish it: when you have
thrown away the wick, and poured out the liquor, put it in your vestband
and bring it to me. Do not be afraid that the liquor will spoil your
clothes, for it is not oil; and the lamp will be dry as soon as it is
thrown out. If you should wish for any of the fruit of the garden, you
may gather as much as you please."

After these words, the magician drew a ring off his finger, and put it
on one of Aladdin's, telling him that it was a preservative against all
evil, while he should observe what he had prescribed to him. After this
instruction he said: "Go down boldly, child, and we shall both be rich
all our lives."

Aladdin jumped into the cave, descended the steps, and found the three
halls just as the African magician had described. He went through them
with all the precaution the fear of death could inspire; crossed the
garden without stopping, took down the lamp from the niche, threw out
the wick and the liquor, and, as the magician had desired, put it in his
vestband. But as he came down from the terrace, he stopped in the garden
to observe the fruit, which he only had a glimpse of in crossing it. All
the trees were loaded with extraordinary fruit, of different colours on
each tree. Some bore fruit entirely white, and some clear and
transparent as crystal; some pale red, and others deeper; some green,
blue, and purple, and others yellow: in short, there was fruit of all
colours. The white were pearls; the clear and transparent, diamonds; the
deep red, rubies; the green, emeralds; the blue, turquoises; the purple,
amethysts; and those that were of yellow cast, sapphires. Aladdin was
altogether ignorant of their worth, and would have preferred figs and
grapes, or any other fruits. But though he took them only for coloured
glass of little value, yet he was so pleased with the variety of the
colours, and the beauty and extraordinary size of the seeming fruit,
that he resolved to gather some of every sort; and accordingly filled
the two new purses his uncle had bought for him with his clothes. Some
he wrapped up in the skirts of his vest, which was of silk, large and
full, and he crammed his bosom as full as it could hold.

Aladdin, having thus loaded himself with riches, returned through the
three halls with the same precaution, made all the haste he could, that
he might not make his uncle wait, and soon arrived at the mouth of the
cave, where the African magician expected him with the utmost
impatience. As soon as Aladdin saw him, he cried out: "Pray, uncle, lend
me your hand, to help me out." "Give me the lamp first," replied the
magician; "it will be troublesome to you." "Indeed, uncle," answered
Aladdin, "I cannot now; it is not troublesome to me: but I will as soon
as I am up." The African magician was so obstinate, that he would have
the lamp before he would help him up; and Aladdin, who had encumbered
himself so much with his fruit that he could not well get at it, refused
to give it to him till he was out of the cave. The African magician,
provoked at this obstinate refusal, flew into a passion, threw a little
of his incense into the fire, which he had taken care to keep in, and no
sooner pronounced two magical words, than the stone which had closed the
mouth of the cave moved into its place, with the earth over it in the
same manner as it lay at the arrival of the magician and Aladdin.

This action of the African magician's plainly shewed him to be neither
Aladdin's uncle, nor Mustapha the tailor's brother; but a true African.
Africa is a country whose inhabitants delight most in magic of any in
the whole world, and he had applied himself to it from his youth. After
forty years' experience in enchantments and reading of magic books, he
had found out that there was in the world a wonderful lamp, the
possession of which would render him more powerful than any monarch; and
by a late operation of geomancy, he had discovered that this lamp lay
concealed in a subterranean place in the midst of China. Fully persuaded
of the truth of this discovery, he set out from the farthest part of
Africa; and after a long and fatiguing journey came to the town nearest
to this treasure. But though he had a certain knowledge of the place
where the lamp was, he was not permitted to take it himself, nor to
enter the subterranean place, but must receive it from the hands of
another person. For this reason he had addressed himself to Aladdin,
whom he looked upon as a lad fit to serve his purpose, resolving, as
soon as he should get the lamp into his hands, to sacrifice him to his
avarice and wickedness, by making the fumigation mentioned before, and
repeating two magical words, the effect of which would remove the stone
into its place, so that no witness would remain of the transaction.

The blow he had given Aladdin was intended to make him obey the more
readily, and give him the lamp as soon as he should ask for it. But his
too great precipitation, and his fear lest somebody should come that way
and discover what he wished to keep secret, produced an effect quite
contrary to what he had proposed.

When the African magician saw that all his hopes were frustrated
forever, he returned the same day for Africa; but went quite round the
town, and at some distance from it, lest some persons who had observed
him walk out with the boy, on seeing him come back without him, should
entertain suspicions, and stop him.

According to all appearances, there was no prospect of Aladdin being
heard of any more. But the magician, when he had contrived his death,
forgot the ring he had put upon his finger, which preserved him, though
he knew not its virtue. It may seem astonishing that the loss of that,
together with the lamp, did not drive the magician to despair; but
magicians are so much used to misfortunes that they do not lay them to
heart, but still feed themselves, to the end of life, with unsubstantial
notions and chimeras.

The surprise of Aladdin, who had never suspected this treachery from his
pretended uncle, is more easily to be imagined than expressed. When he
found himself buried alive, he cried, and called out to his uncle, to
tell him he was ready to give him the lamp; but in vain, since his cries
could not be heard. He descended to the bottom of the steps, with a
design to get into the garden, but the door, which was opened before by
enchantment, was now shut by the same means. He then redoubled his
cries, sat down on the steps, without any hopes of ever seeing light
again, and in a melancholy certainty of passing from the present
darkness into that of a speedy death.

Aladdin remained in this state two days, without eating or drinking, and
on the third looked upon death as inevitable. Clasping his hands with
resignation to the will of God, he said: "There is no strength or power
but in the great and high God." In joining his hands he rubbed the ring
which the magician had put on his finger, and of which he knew not yet
the virtue. Immediately a genie of enormous size and frightful aspect
rose out of the earth, his head reaching the roof of the vault, and said
to him: "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as the slave of
all who may possess the ring on thy finger; I, and the other slaves of
that ring."

At another time, Aladdin, who had not been used to such appearances,
would have been so frightened at the sight of so extraordinary a figure
that he would not have been able to speak; but the danger he was in made
him answer without hesitation: "Whoever thou art, deliver me from this
place, if thou art able." He had no sooner spoken these words, than he
found himself on the very spot where the magician had caused the earth
to open.

It was some time before his eyes could bear the light, after being so
long in total darkness: but after he had endeavoured by degrees to
support it, and began to look about him, he was much surprised not to
find the earth open, and could not comprehend how he had got so soon out
of its bowels. There was nothing to be seen but the place where the fire
had been, by which he could nearly judge the situation of the cave. Then
turning himself toward the town, he perceived it at a distance in the
midst of the gardens that surrounded it, and saw the way by which the
magician had brought him. Returning God thanks to find himself once more
in the world, he made the best of his way home. When he got within his
mother's door, the joy of seeing her and his weakness for want of food
for three days made him faint, and he remained for a long time as dead.
His mother, who had given him over for lost, seeing him in this
condition, omitted nothing to bring him to himself. As soon as he
recovered, the first words he spoke were: "Pray, mother, give me
something to eat, for I have not put a morsel of anything into my mouth
these three days." His mother brought what she had, and set it before
him. "My son," said she, "be not too eager, for it is dangerous; eat but
little at a time, and take care of yourself. Besides, I would not have
you talk; you will have time enough to tell me what has happened to you
when you are recovered. It is a great comfort to me to see you again,
after the affliction I have been in since Friday, and the pains I have
taken to learn what was become of you."

Aladdin took his mother's advice, and ate and drank moderately. When he
had done, "Mother," said he to her, "I cannot help complaining of you,
for abandoning me so easily to the discretion of a man who had a design
to kill me, and who at this very moment thinks my death certain. You
believed he was my uncle, as well as I; and what other thoughts could we
entertain of a man who was so kind to me? but I must tell you, mother,
he is a rogue and a cheat, and only made me those promises to accomplish
my death; but for what reason neither you nor I can guess. You shall
judge yourself, when you have heard all that passed from the time I left
you, till he came to the execution of his wicked design."

Aladdin then related to his mother all that had happened to him, from
the Friday when the magician took him to see the palaces and gardens
about the town, till they came to the place between the two mountains
where the great deed was to be performed; how, with incense which the
magician threw into the fire, and some magical words which he
pronounced, the earth opened, and discovered a cave, which led to an
inestimable treasure. He did not forget the blow the magician had given
him, and in what manner he softened again, and engaged him by great
promises, and putting a ring on his finger, to go down into the cave. He
did not omit the least circumstance of what he saw in crossing the three
halls and the garden, and his taking the lamp, which he pulled out of
his bosom and shewed to his mother: as well as the transparent fruit of
different colours, which he had gathered in the garden as he returned.
But, though these fruits were precious stones, brilliant as the sun, she
was as ignorant of their worth as her son. She had been bred in a low
rank of life, and her husband's poverty prevented his being possessed of
jewels, nor had she, her relations, or neighbours ever seen any; so that
we must not wonder that she regarded them as things of no value.

Aladdin put them behind one of the cushions of the sofa, and continued
his story. When he had come to an end, Aladdin said to his mother: "I
need say no more! this is my adventure, and the dangers I have been
exposed to since you saw me."

His mother heard with much interest this surprising relation,
notwithstanding it could be no small affliction to a mother who loved
her son tenderly; but yet in the most moving part, which discovered the
perfidy of the African magician, she could not help showing, by marks of
the greatest indignation, how much she detested him; and when her son
had finished his story, she broke out into a thousand reproaches against
that vile impostor. She called him perfidious traitor, barbarian,
assassin, deceiver, magician, and an enemy and destroyer of mankind.
"Without doubt, child," added she, "he is a magician, and they are
plagues to the world, and by their enchantments and sorceries have
commerce with the devil. Bless God for preserving you from his wicked
designs; for your death would have been inevitable, if you had not
called upon Him, and implored His assistance." She said a great deal
more against the magician's treachery; but finding that whilst she
talked, Aladdin began to doze, she left him to his repose, and retired.

Aladdin, who had not closed his eyes while he was in the subterranean
abode, slept very soundly till late the next morning; when the first
thing he said to his mother was, that he wanted something to eat, and
that she could not do him a greater kindness than to give him his
breakfast. "Alas! child," said she, "I have not a bit of bread to give
you, you ate up all the provisions I had in the house yesterday; but
have a little patience, and it shall not be long before I will bring you
some: I have a little cotton, which I have spun; I will go and sell it,
buy bread, and something for our dinner." "Mother," replied Aladdin,
"keep your cotton for another time, and give me the lamp I brought home
with me yesterday; I will go and sell it, and the money I shall get for
it will serve both for breakfast and dinner, and perhaps supper too."

Aladdin's mother took the lamp, and said to her son: "Here it is, but it
is very dirty; if it was a little cleaner I believe it would bring
something more." She took some fine sand and water to clean it; but had
no sooner begun to rub it, than in an instant a hideous genie of
gigantic size appeared before her, and said to her in a voice like
thunder: "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave,
and the slave of all those who have that lamp in their hands; I and the
other slaves of the lamp."

Aladdin's mother, terrified at the sight of the genie, fainted; when the
lad, who had seen such another phantom in the cavern, snatched the lamp
out of his mother's hand, and said to the genie boldly: "I am hungry,
bring me something to eat." The genie disappeared immediately, and in an
instant returned with a large silver tray, holding twelve covered dishes
of the same metal, which contained the most delicious viands; six large
white bread-cakes on two plates, two flagons of wine, and two silver
cups. All these he placed upon a carpet, and disappeared: this was done
before Aladdin's mother recovered from her swoon.

Aladdin fetched some water, and sprinkled it in her face, to recover
her: whether that or the smell of the meat brought her to life again, it
was not long before she came to herself. "Mother," said Aladdin, "do not
mind this; here is what will put you in heart, and at the same time
satisfy my extreme hunger: do not let such delicious meat get cold."

His mother was much surprised to see the great tray, twelve dishes, six
loaves, the two flagons and cups, and to smell the savoury odour which
exhaled from the dishes. "Child," said she, "to whom are we obliged for
this great plenty and liberality; has the sultan been made acquainted
with our poverty, and had compassion on us?" "It is no matter, mother,"
said Aladdin; "let us sit down and eat, for you have almost as much need
of breakfast as myself; when we have done, I will tell you."
Accordingly, both mother and son sat down, and ate with the better
relish as the table was so well furnished. But all the time Aladdin's
mother could not forbear looking at and admiring the dishes, though she
could not judge whether they were silver or any other metal, and the
novelty more than the value attracted her attention.

The mother and son sat at breakfast till it was dinner-time, and then
they thought it would be best to put the two meals together; yet after
this they found they should have enough left for supper, and two meals
for the next day.

When Aladdin's mother had taken away what was left, she went and sat by
her son on the sofa, saying: "I expect now that you should satisfy my
impatience, and tell me exactly what passed between the genie and you
while I was in a swoon;" which he readily complied with.

She was in as great amazement at what her son told her, as at the
appearance of the genie; and said to him: "But, son, what have we to do
with genies? I never heard that any of my acquaintance had ever seen
one. How came that vile genie to address himself to me, and not to you,
to whom he had appeared before in the cave?" "Mother," answered Aladdin,
"the genie you saw is not the one who appeared to me, though he
resembles him in size; no, they had quite different persons and habits;
they belong to different masters. If you remember, he that I first saw
called himself the slave of the ring on my finger; and this you saw,
called himself the slave of the lamp you had in your hand: but I believe
you did not hear him, for I think you fainted as soon as he began to
speak."

"What!" cried the mother, "was your lamp then the occasion of that
cursed genie's addressing himself rather to me than to you? Ah! my son,
take it out of my sight, and put it where you please. I will never touch
it. I had rather you would sell it, than run the hazard of being
frightened to death again by touching it: and if you would take my
advice, you would part also with the ring, and not have anything to do
with genies, who, as our prophet has told us, are only devils."

"With your leave, mother," replied Aladdin, "I shall take care how I
sell a lamp which may be so serviceable both to you and me. Have you not
been an eye-witness of what it has procured us? and it shall still
continue to furnish us with subsistence. My false and wicked uncle would
not have taken so much pains, and undertaken so long a journey, if it
had not been to get into his possession this wonderful lamp, which he
preferred before all the gold and silver which he knew was in the halls.
He knew too well the worth of this lamp, not to prefer it to so great a
treasure; and since chance hath discovered the virtue of it to us, let
us make a profitable use of it, without making any great show, and
exciting the envy and jealousy of our neighbours. However, since the
genies frighten you so much, I will take it out of your sight, and put
it where I may find it when I want it. The ring I cannot resolve to part
with; for without that you had never seen me again; and though I am
alive now, perhaps, if it was gone, I might not be so some moments
hence; therefore I hope you will give me leave to keep it, and to wear
it always on my finger. Who knows what dangers you and I may be exposed
to, which neither of us can foresee, and from which it may deliver us?"
As Aladdin's arguments were just, his mother had nothing to say against
them; she only replied, that he might do what he pleased; for her part,
she would have nothing to do with genies, but would wash her hands of
them.

By the next night they had eaten all the provisions the genie had
brought: and the next day Aladdin, who could not bear the thought of
hunger, putting one of the silver dishes under his vest, went out early
to sell it, and addressing himself to a Jew whom he met in the streets,
took him aside, and pulling out the plate, asked him if he would buy it.
The cunning Jew took the dish, examined it, and as soon as he found that
it was good silver, asked Aladdin at how much he valued it. Aladdin, who
knew not its value, and never had been used to such traffic, told him he
would trust to his judgment and honour. The Jew was somewhat confounded
at this plain dealing; and doubting whether Aladdin understood the
material or the full value of what he offered to sell, took a piece of
gold out of his purse and gave it to him, though it was but the sixtieth
part of the worth of the plate. Aladdin, taking the money very eagerly,
retired with so much haste, that the Jew, not content with the
exorbitancy of his profit, was vexed he had not penetrated into his
ignorance, and was going to run after him, to endeavour to get some
change out of the piece of gold; but the lad ran so fast, and had got so
far, that it would have been impossible for him to overtake him.

Before Aladdin went home, he called at a baker's, bought some cakes of
bread, changed his money, and on his return gave the rest to his mother,
who went and purchased provisions enough to last them some time. After
this manner they lived, till Aladdin had sold the twelve dishes singly,
as necessity pressed, to the Jew, for the same money; who, after the
first time, durst not offer him less, for fear of losing so good a
bargain. When he had sold the last dish, he had recourse to the tray,
which weighed ten times as much as the dishes, and would have carried it
to his old purchaser, but that it was too large and cumbersome;
therefore he was obliged to bring him home with him to his mother's,
where, after the Jew had examined the weight of the tray, he laid down
ten pieces of gold, with which Aladdin was very well satisfied.

They lived on these ten pieces in a frugal manner, for Aladdin, though
formerly used to an idle life, had left off playing with young lads of
his own age ever since his adventure with the African magician. He spent
his time in walking about, and conversing with decent people, with whom
he gradually got acquainted. Sometimes he would stop at the principal
merchants' shops, where people of distinction met, and listen to their
discourse, by which he gained some little knowledge of the world.

When all the money was spent, Aladdin had recourse again to the lamp. He
took it in his hand, looked for the part where his mother had rubbed it
with the sand, and rubbed it also, when the genie immediately appeared,
and said: "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave,
and the slave of all those who have that lamp in their hands; I, and the
other slaves of the lamp." "I am hungry," said Aladdin; "bring me
something to eat." The genie disappeared, and presently returned with a
tray, and the same number of covered dishes as before, set them down,
and vanished.

Aladdin's mother, knowing what her son was going to do, went out about
some business, on purpose to avoid being in the way when the genie came;
and when she returned, was almost as much surprised as before at the
prodigious effect of the lamp. However, she sat down with her son, and
when they had eaten as much as they liked, she set enough by to last
them two or three days.

As soon as Aladdin found that their provisions were expended, he took
one of the dishes, and went to look for his Jew again; but passing by
the shop of a goldsmith, who had the character of a very fair and honest
man, the goldsmith perceiving him, called to him, and said: "My lad, I
have often observed you go by, loaded as you are at present, and talk
with such a Jew, and then come back again empty-handed. I imagine that
you carry something which you sell to him; but perhaps you do not know
that he is the greatest rogue even among the Jews, and that nobody of
prudence will have anything to do with him. If you will shew me what you
now carry, and it is to be sold, I will give you the full worth of it;
or I will direct you to other merchants who will not cheat you."

The hopes of getting more money for his plate induced Aladdin to pull it
from under his vest, and shew it to the goldsmith, who at first sight
saw that it was made of the finest silver and asked him if he had sold
such as that to the Jew, when Aladdin told him that he had sold him
twelve such, for a piece of gold each. "What a villain!" cried the
goldsmith; "but," added he, "my son, what is past cannot be recalled. By
shewing you the value of this plate, which is of the finest silver we
use in our shops, I will let you see how much the Jew has cheated you."

The goldsmith took a pair of scales, weighed the dish, and after he had
mentioned how much an ounce of fine silver was worth, assured him that
his plate would fetch by weight sixty pieces of gold, which he offered
to pay down immediately. "If you dispute my honesty," said he, "you may
go to any other of our trade, and if he gives you more, I will be bound
to forfeit twice as much!"

Aladdin thanked him for his fair dealing, so greatly to his advantage,
took the gold, and never after went to any other person, but sold him
all his dishes and the tray.

Though Aladdin and his mother had an inexhaustible treasure in their
lamp, and might have had whatever they wished for, yet they lived with
the same frugality as before, except that Aladdin dressed better; as for
his mother, she wore no clothes but what she earned by spinning cotton.
After their manner of living, it may easily be supposed that the money
for which Aladdin had sold the dishes and tray was sufficient to
maintain them for some time.

During this interval, Aladdin frequented the shops of the principal
merchants, where they sold cloth of gold and silver, linens, silk
stuffs, and jewelry, and oftentimes joining in their conversation,
acquired a knowledge of the world, and respectable demeanour. By his
acquaintance among the jewellers, he came to know that the fruits which
he had gathered when he took the lamp were, instead of coloured glass,
stones of inestimable value; but he had the prudence not to mention this
to any one, not even to his mother.

One day as Aladdin was walking about the town, he heard an order
proclaimed, commanding the people to shut up their shops and houses, and
keep within doors, while the Princess Badroulboudour, the sultan's
daughter, went to the baths and returned.

This proclamation inspired Aladdin with eager curiosity to see the
princess's face, which he could not do without admission into the house
of some acquaintance, and then only through a window; but to gratify his
curiosity, he presently thought of a scheme, which succeeded; it was to
place himself behind the door of the bath, which was so situated that he
could not fail of seeing her face.

Aladdin had not waited long before the princess came, and he could see
her plainly through a chink of the door without being discovered. She
was attended by a great crowd of ladies, slaves, and eunuchs, who walked
on each side, and behind her. When she came within three or four paces
of the door of the baths, she took off her veil, and gave Aladdin an
opportunity of a full view.

As soon as Aladdin had seen the princess, his heart could not withstand
those inclinations so charming an object always inspires. She was the
most beautiful brunette in the world; her eyes were large, lively, and
sparkling; her looks sweet and modest; her nose was of a just proportion
and without a fault, her mouth small, her lips of a vermilion red; in a
word, all the features of her face were perfectly regular. It is not
therefore surprising that Aladdin, who had never before seen such a
blaze of charms, was dazzled, and his senses ravished by such an
assemblage. With all these perfections the princess had so majestic an
air, that the sight of her was sufficient to inspire love and
admiration.

After the princess had passed by, and entered the baths, Aladdin
remained some time astonished and in a kind of ecstasy, retracing and
imprinting the idea of so charming an object deeply in his mind, but at
last, he resolved to quit his hiding-place and go home. He could not so
far conceal his uneasiness but that his mother perceived it, was
surprised to see him so much more thoughtful than usual; and asked if he
were ill? He returned her no answer, but sat carelessly down on the
sofa, and remained silently musing on the image of the charming
Badroulboudour.

After supper, his mother asked him again why he was so melancholy, but
could get no information, and he determined to go to bed rather than
give her the least satisfaction. As he sat next day on the sofa,
opposite his mother, however, as she was spinning cotton, he spoke to
her in these words: "I perceive, mother, that my silence yesterday has
much troubled you; I was not, nor am I ill; but I assure you, that what
I felt then, and now endure, is worse than any disease.

"It was not proclaimed in this quarter of the town, and therefore you
could know nothing of it, that the sultan's daughter was yesterday to go
to the baths. I had a great curiosity to see her face; and as it
occurred to me that when she came nigh the bath, she would pull her veil
off, I resolved to conceal myself behind the door. She did so and I had
the happiness of seeing her lovely face with the greatest security.
This, mother, was the cause of my silence yesterday; I love the princess
with more violence than I can express; and as my passion increases every
moment, I am resolved to ask her in marriage of the sultan, her
father."

Aladdin's mother listened with interest to what her son told her; but
when he talked of asking the princess in marriage, she could not help
bursting out into a loud laugh. He would have gone on with his rhapsody,
but she interrupted him: "Alas! child," said she, "what are you thinking
of? you must be mad to talk thus."

"I assure you, mother," replied Aladdin, "that I am not mad, but in my
right senses; I foresaw that you would reproach me with folly and
extravagance; but I must tell you once more, that I am resolved to
demand the princess in marriage!"

"Indeed, son," replied the mother seriously, "I cannot help telling you
that you have forgotten yourself, and I do not see who will venture to
make the proposal for you." "You yourself," replied he immediately. "I
go to the sultan!" answered the mother, amazed. "I shall be cautious how
I engage in such an errand. Why, who are you, son," continued she, "that
you can have the assurance to think of your sultan's daughter? Have you
forgotten that your father was one of the poorest tailors in the
capital, and that I am of no better extraction; and do not you know that
sultans never marry their daughters but to sons of sovereigns like
themselves?"

"Mother," answered Aladdin, "I foresaw all that you have said, or can
say: and tell you that neither your discourse nor your remonstrances
shall make me change my mind. I have told you that you must ask the
princess in marriage for me. I beg of you not to refuse, unless you
would rather see me in my grave, than by your compliance give me new
life."

The good old woman was much embarrassed, when she found Aladdin
persisting in so wild a design. "My son," said she again, "I am your
mother, and there is nothing that is reasonable but I would readily do
for you. If I were to go and treat about your marriage with some
neighbour's daughter, I would do it with all my heart; and even then
they would expect you should have some little estate, or be of some
trade. When such poor folks as we are wish to marry, the first thing
they ought to think of, is how to live. But without reflecting on the
meanness of your birth, and the little fortune you have to recommend
you, you aim at the highest pitch of exaltation; and your pretensions
are no less than to demand in marriage the daughter of your sovereign,
who with one single word can crush you to pieces. How could so
extraordinary a thought come into your head, as that I should go to the
sultan and ask him to give his daughter in marriage to you? Suppose I
had the impudence to present myself before the sultan, to whom should I
address myself to be introduced to his majesty? Do you not think the
first person I should speak to would take me for a mad woman, and
chastise me as I should deserve? I know there is no difficulty to those
who go to petition for justice, which the sultan distributes equally
among his subjects; I know, too, that to those who ask a favour he
grants it with pleasure when he sees it is deserved. But do you think
you have merited the honour you would have me ask? What have you done to
claim such a favour, either for your prince or country? How can I open
my mouth to make the proposal to the sultan? His majestic presence and
the lustre of his court would absolutely confound me. There is another
reason, my son, which you do not think of, which is that nobody ever
goes to ask a favour of the sultan without a present. But what presents
have you to make? and what proportion could they bear to the favour you
would ask? Therefore, reflect well, and consider that you aspire to an
object which it is impossible for you to obtain."

Aladdin heard very calmly all that his mother could say to dissuade him
from his design, and after he had weighed her representations replied:
"I own, mother, it is great rashness in me to presume to carry my
pretensions so far; and a great want of consideration to ask you to go
and make the proposal to the sultan, without first taking proper
measures to procure a favourable reception, and I therefore beg your
pardon. But be not surprised that I did not at first see every measure
necessary to procure me the happiness I seek. I love the princess, and
shall always persevere in my design of marrying her. I am obliged to you
for the hint you have given me, and look upon it as the first step I
ought to take to procure the happy issue I promise myself.

"You say it is not customary to go to the sultan without a present, and
that I have nothing worthy of his acceptance. Do not you think, mother,
that what I brought home with me the day on which I was delivered from
death may be an acceptable present? I mean those things that you and I
both took for coloured glass: but now I can tell you that they are
jewels of inestimable value. I know the worth of them by frequenting the
shops; and you may take my word that all the precious stones which I saw
in the jewellers' shops were not to be compared to those we have, either
for size or beauty; I am persuaded that they will be received very
favourably by the sultan: you have a large porcelain dish fit to hold
them; fetch it, and let us see how they will look, when we have arranged
them according to their different colours."

Aladdin's mother brought the china dish, when he took the jewels out of
the two purses in which he had kept them, and placed them in order
according to his fancy. But the brightness and lustre they emitted in
the daytime so dazzled the eyes both of mother and son, that they were
astonished beyond measure; for they had only seen them by the light of a
lamp; and though the latter had beheld them pendent on the trees like
fruit beautiful to the eye, yet as he was then but a boy, he looked on
them only as glittering playthings.

After they had admired the beauty of the jewels some time, Aladdin said
to his mother: "Now you cannot excuse yourself from going to the sultan,
under pretext of not having a present to make him, since here is one
which will gain you a favourable reception."

Though the good widow did not believe the precious stones so valuable as
her son estimated them, she thought such a present might nevertheless be
agreeable to the sultan, but she still hesitated. "My son," said she, "I
cannot conceive that the sultan will look upon me with a favourable eye;
I am sure, that if I attempt to deliver your strange message, I shall
have no power to open my mouth; therefore I shall not only lose my
labour, but the present, which you say is so valuable, and shall return
home again in confusion, to tell you that your hopes are frustrated.
But," added she, "I will do my best to please you, though certainly the
sultan will either laugh at me, or be in so great a rage, as to make us
both the victims of his fury."

She used many other arguments to endeavour to make Aladdin change his
mind; but he persisted in importuning his mother to execute his
resolution, and she, out of tenderness, complied with his request.

As it was now late, and the time for admission to the palace was passed,
the visit was put off till the next day. The mother and son talked of
different matters the remaining hours; and Aladdin strove to encourage
her in the task she had undertaken; while she could not persuade herself
she should succeed; and it must be confessed she had reason enough to
doubt. "Child," said she to Aladdin, "if the sultan should hear my
proposal with calmness, and after this should think of asking me where
lie your riches and your estate, what answer would you have me return
him?"

"Let us not be uneasy, mother," replied Aladdin, "about what may never
happen. First, let us see how the sultan receives, and what answer he
gives you. If he desires to be informed of what you mention, I am
confident that the lamp will not fail me in time of need."

The tailor's widow reflected that the lamp might be capable of doing
greater wonders than just providing victuals for them, and this removed
all the difficulties which might have prevented her from undertaking the
service she had promised. Aladdin, who penetrated into his mother's
thoughts, said to her: "Above all things, mother, be sure to keep secret
our possession of the lamp, for thereon depends the success we have to
expect;" and after this caution they parted to go to rest. Aladdin rose
before daybreak, awakened his mother, pressing her to get herself
dressed to go to the sultan's palace, and to get admittance, if
possible, before the great officers of state went in to take their seats
in the divan, where the sultan always assisted in person.

Aladdin's mother took the china dish, in which they had put the jewels
the day before, wrapped in two napkins, one finer than the other, which
was tied at the four corners for more easy carriage, and set out for the
palace. When she came to the gates, the grand vizier, the other viziers,
and most distinguished lords of the court, were just gone in; but,
notwithstanding the great crowd of people who had business there, she
got into the divan, a spacious hall, the entrance into which was very
magnificent. She placed herself just before the sultan, grand vizier,
and the great lords, who sat in council, on his right and left hand.
Several causes were called, according to their order, pleaded and
adjudged, until the time the divan generally broke up, when the sultan
rising, returned to his apartment, attended by the grand vizier; the
other viziers and ministers of state then retired, as also did all those
whose business had called them thither; some pleased with gaining their
causes, others dissatisfied at the sentences pronounced against them,
and some in expectation of being heard the next sitting.

Aladdin's mother, seeing the sultan retire, and all the people depart,
judged rightly that he would not sit again that day, and resolved to go
home. When Aladdin saw her return with the present, he knew not what to
think, and in fear lest she should bring him some ill news, had not
courage to ask her any questions; but she, who had never set foot into
the sultan's palace before, and knew not what was every day practised
there, freed him from his embarrassment, and said to him: "Son, I have
seen the sultan, and am very well persuaded he has seen me too; for I
placed myself just before him; but he was so much taken up with those
who attended on all sides of him, that I pitied him, and wondered at his
patience. At last I believe he was heartily tired, for he rose up
suddenly, and would not hear a great many who were ready prepared to
speak to him, but went away, at which I was well pleased, for indeed I
began to lose all patience, and was extremely fatigued with staying so
long. But there is no harm done; I will go again to-morrow; perhaps the
sultan may not be so busy."

Though his passion was very violent, Aladdin was forced to be satisfied,
and to fortify himself with patience. He had at least the satisfaction
to find that his mother had got over the greatest difficulty, which was
to procure access to the sultan, and hoped that the example of those she
saw speak to him would embolden her to acquit herself better of her
commission when a favourable opportunity might offer.

The next morning she repaired to the sultan's palace with the present,
as early as the day before, but when she came there, she found the gates
of the divan shut, and understood that the council sat but every other
day, therefore she must come again the next. This news she carried to
her son, whose only relief was to guard himself with patience. She went
six times afterward on the days appointed and placed herself always
directly before the sultan, but with as little success as the first
morning, and might have perhaps come a thousand times to as little
purpose, if luckily the sultan himself had not taken particular notice
of her.

On the sixth day, after the divan was broken up, when the sultan
returned to his own apartment, he said to his grand vizier: "I have for
some time observed a certain woman, who attends constantly every day
that I give audience, with something wrapped up in a napkin: she always
stands up from the beginning to the breaking up of the audience, and
affects to place herself just before me. Do you know what she wants?"

"Sir," replied the grand vizier, who knew no more than the sultan what
she wanted, but did not wish to seem uninformed, "your majesty knows
that women often make complaints on trifles; perhaps she may come to
complain that somebody has sold her some bad flour, or some such
trifling matter." The sultan was not satisfied with this answer, but
replied: "If this woman comes to our next audience, do not fail to call
her, that I may hear what she has to say." The grand vizier made answer
by lowering his hand, and then lifting it up above his head, signifying
his willingness to lose it if he failed.

By this time, the tailor's widow was so much used to go to audience, and
stand before the sultan, that she did not think it any trouble, if she
could but satisfy her son that she neglected nothing that lay in her
power to please him: so the next audience-day she went to the divan and
placed herself in front of the sultan as usual; and before the grand
vizier had made his report of business, the sultan perceived her, and
compassionating her for having waited so long, said to the vizier:
"Before you enter upon any business, remember the woman I spoke to you
about; bid her come near, and let us despatch her business first." The
grand vizier immediately called the chief of the mace-bearers, and
pointing to her, bade him tell her to come before the sultan.

The chief of the officers went to Aladdin's mother, and at a sign he
gave her, she followed him to the foot of the sultan's throne, where he
left her, and retired to his place by the grand vizier. The old woman
bowed her head down to the carpet, which covered the platform of the
throne, and remained in that posture till the sultan bade her rise, when
he said to her: "Good woman, I have observed you to stand from the
beginning to the rising of the divan; what business brings you here?"

After these words, Aladdin's mother prostrated herself a second time;
and when she arose, said: "Monarch of monarchs, before I tell your
majesty the extraordinary and incredible business which brings me before
your high throne, I beg of you to pardon the boldness of the demand I am
going to make, which is so uncommon, that I tremble, and am ashamed to
propose it to my sovereign." In order to give her the more freedom to
explain herself, the sultan ordered all to quit the divan but the grand
vizier, and then told her she might speak without restraint.

Aladdin's mother, not content with this favour of the sultan's to save
her the confusion of speaking before so many people, was,
notwithstanding, a little apprehensive; therefore, resuming her
discourse, she said: "I beg of your majesty, if you should think my
demand the least offensive, to assure me first of your forgiveness."
"Well," replied the sultan, "I will forgive you, be it what it may, and
no hurt shall come to you: speak boldly."

When Aladdin's mother had taken all these precautions, she told him
faithfully how Aladdin had seen the Princess Badroulboudour, the violent
love that fatal sight had inspired him with, the declaration he had made
to her when he came home, and what she had said to dissuade him. "But,"
continued she, "my son, instead of taking my advice and reflecting on
his presumption, was so obstinate as to persevere, and to threaten me
with some desperate act, if I refused to come and ask the princess in
marriage of your majesty; and it was not without the greatest reluctance
that I was led to accede to his request, for which I beg your majesty
once more to pardon not only me, but also Aladdin my son, for
entertaining so rash a project."

The sultan hearkened to this discourse without shewing the least anger;
but before he gave her any answer, asked her what she had brought tied
up in the napkin? She took the china dish, which she had set down at the
foot of the throne before she prostrated herself before him, untied it,
and presented it to the sultan.

The monarch's amazement and surprise were inexpressible, when he saw so
many large, beautiful, and valuable jewels collected in the dish. He
remained for some time motionless with admiration. At last, when he had
recovered himself, he received the present, crying out in a transport of
joy: "How rich, how beautiful!" After he had admired and handled all the
jewels, one after another, he turned to his grand vizier, and shewing
him the dish, said: "Behold, admire, wonder, and confess that your eyes
never beheld jewels so rich and beautiful before." The vizier was
charmed. "Well," continued the sultan, "what sayest thou to such a
present? Is it not worthy of the princess, my daughter? And ought I not
to bestow her on one who values her at so great price?"
