The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Arabian Nights, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Arabian Nights
       Their Best-known Tales

Author: Unknown

Editor: Kate Douglas Wiggin
        Nora A. Smith

Illustrator: Maxfield Parrish

Release Date: March 27, 2007 [EBook #20916]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ***




Produced by Irma pehar, Graeme Mackreth, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







THE ARABIAN NIGHTS




THE
ARABIAN NIGHTS

THEIR BEST-KNOWN TALES

EDITED BY

KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN
AND
NORA A. SMITH

ILLUSTRATED BY MAXFIELD PARRISH

NEW YORK
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
MCMIX

Copyright, 1909, by
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

Published October, 1909




PREFACE

_Little excuse is needed, perhaps, for any fresh selection from the
famous "Tales of a Thousand and One Nights," provided it be
representative enough, and worthy enough, to enlist a new army of
youthful readers. Of the two hundred and sixty-four bewildering,
unparalleled stories, the true lover can hardly spare one, yet there
must always be favourites, even among these. We have chosen some of the
most delightful, in our opinion; some, too, that chanced to appeal
particularly to the genius of the artist. If, enticed by our choice and
the beauty of the pictures, we manage to attract a few thousand more
true lovers to the fountain-book, we shall have served our humble turn.
The only real danger lies in neglecting it, in rearing a child who does
not know it and has never fallen under its spell._

_You remember Maimoune, in the story of Prince Camaralzaman, and what she
said to Danhasch, the genie who had just arrived from the farthest
limits of China? "Be sure thou tellest me nothing but what is true or I
shall clip thy wings!" This is what the modern child sometimes says to
the genies of literature, and his own wings are too often clipped in
consequence._

   _"The Empire of the Fairies is no more.
   Reason has banished them from ev'ry shore;
   Steam has outstripped their dragons and their cars,
   Gas has eclipsed their glow-worms and their stars."_

_Édouard Laboulaye says in his introduction to Nouveaux Contes Bleus:
"Mothers who love your children, do not set them too soon to the study
of history; let them dream while they are young. Do not close the soul
to the first breath of poetry. Nothing affrights me so much as the
reasonable, practical child who believes in nothing that he cannot
touch. These sages of ten years are, at twenty, dullards, or what is
still worse, egoists."_

_When a child has once read of Prince Agib, of Gulnare or Periezade,
Sinbad or Codadad, in this or any other volume of its kind, the magic
will have been instilled into the blood, for the Oriental flavour in the
Arab tales is like nothing so much as magic. True enough they are a vast
storehouse of information concerning the manners and the customs, the
spirit and the life of the Moslem East (and the youthful reader does not
have to study Lane's learned foot-notes to imbibe all this), but beyond
and above the knowledge of history and geography thus gained, there
comes something finer and subtler as well as something more vital. The
scene is Indian, Egyptian, Arabian, Persian; but Bagdad and Balsora,
Grand Cairo, the silver Tigris, and the blooming gardens of Damascus,
though they can be found indeed on the map, live much more truly in that
enchanted realm that rises o'er "the foam of perilous seas in faery
lands forlorn." What craft can sail those perilous seas like the book
that has been called a great three-decker to carry tired people to
Islands of the Blest? "The immortal fragment," says Sir Richard Burton,
who perhaps knew the Arabian Nights as did no other European, "will
never be superseded in the infallible judgment of childhood. The
marvellous imaginativeness of the Tales produces an insensible
brightness of mind and an increase of fancy-power, making one dream that
behind them lies the new and unseen, the strange and unexpected--in
fact, all the glamour of the unknown."_

_It would be a delightful task to any boy or girl to begin at the
beginning and read the first English version of these famous stories,
made from the collection of M. Galland, Professor of Arabic in the Royal
College of Paris. The fact that they had passed from Arabic into French
and from French into English did not prevent their instantaneous
popularity. This was in 1704 or thereabouts, and the world was not so
busy as it is nowadays, or young men would not have gathered in the
middle of the night under M. Galland's window and cried: "O vous, qui
savez de si jolis contes, et qui les racontez si bien, racontez nous en
un!"_

_You can also read them in Scott's edition or in Lane's (both of which,
but chiefly the former, we have used as the foundation of our text),
while your elders--philologists or Orientalists--are studying the
complete versions of John Payne or Sir Richard Burton. You may leave the
wiseacres to wonder which were told in China or India, Arabia or Persia,
and whether the first manuscript dates back to 1450 or earlier._

_We, like many other editors, have shortened the stories here and there,
omitting some of the tedious repetitions that crept in from time to time
when Arabian story-tellers were adding to the text to suit their
purposes._

_Mr. Andrew Lang says amusingly that he has left out of his special
versions "all the pieces that are suitable only for Arabs and old
gentlemen," and we have done the same; but we have taken no undue
liberties. We have removed no genies nor magicians, however terrible;
have cut out no base deed of Vizier nor noble deed of Sultan; have
diminished the size of no roc's egg, nor omitted any single allusion to
the great and only Haroun Al-raschid, Caliph of Bagdad, Commander of the
Faithful, who must have been a great inspirer of good stories._

_Enter into this "treasure house of pleasant things," then, and make
yourself at home in the golden palaces, the gem-studded caves, the
bewildering gardens. Sit by its mysterious fountains, hear the plash of
its gleaming cascades, unearth its magic lamps and talismans, behold its
ensorcelled princes and princesses._

_Nowhere in the whole realm of literature will you find such a Marvel,
such a Wonder, such a Nonesuch of a book; nowhere will you find
impossibilities so real and so convincing; nowhere but in what Henley
calls:_

   _"... that blessed brief
     Of what is gallantest and best
   In all the full-shelved Libraries of Romance.
       The Book of rocs,
     Sandalwood, ivory, turbans, ambergris,
   Cream-tarts, and lettered apes, and Calenders,
     And ghouls, and genies--O so huge
   They might have overed the tall Minster Tower,
     Hands down, as schoolboys take a post;
     In truth the Book of Camaralzaman,
   Schemselnihar and Sinbad, Scheherezade
     The peerless, Bedreddin, Badroulbadour,
       Cairo and Serendib and Candahar,
   And Caspian, and the dim, terrific bulk--
   Ice-ribbed, fiend-visited, isled in spells and storms--
     Of Kaf ... That centre of miracles
     The sole, unparalleled Arabian Nights."_

KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN.
August, 1909.




CONTENTS


THE TALKING BIRD, THE SINGING TREE, AND THE
GOLDEN WATER                                                          3

THE STORY OF THE FISHERMAN AND THE GENIE                             52

THE HISTORY OF THE YOUNG KING OF THE BLACK ISLES                     67

THE STORY OF GULNARE OF THE SEA                                      81

THE STORY OF ALADDIN; OR, THE WONDERFUL LAMP                         97

THE STORY OF PRINCE AGIB                                            190

THE STORY OF THE CITY OF BRASS                                      205

THE STORY OF ALI BABA AND THE FORTY THIEVES                         229

THE HISTORY OF CODADAD AND HIS BROTHERS                             264

THE STORY OF SINBAD THE VOYAGER                                     290


ILLUSTRATIONS

FROM DRAWINGS IN COLORS
BY MAXFIELD PARRISH


THE TALKING BIRD                                                     32

It will be sufficient to break off a branch and carry it to
plant in your garden

THE FISHERMAN AND THE GENIE                                          54

The smoke ascended to the clouds, and extending itself along
the sea and upon the shore formed a great mist

THE YOUNG KING OF THE BLACK ISLES                                    74

When he came to this part of his narrative the young king
could not restrain his tears

GULNARE OF THE SEA                                                   86

And she proceeded to burn perfume and repeat spells until the
sea foamed and was agitated

ALADDIN                                                             106

At the same time the earth, trembling, opened just before the
magician, and uncovered a stone, laid horizontally, with a
brass ring fixed into the middle

PRINCE AGIB                                                         194

And when the boat came to me I found in it a man
of brass, with a tablet of lead upon his breast,
engraven with names and talismans

PRINCE AGIB                                                         202

At the approach of evening I opened the first closet and, entering
it, found a mansion like paradise

THE CITY OF BRASS                                                   218

And when they had ascended that mountain they saw a city than
which eyes had not beheld any greater

THE STORY OF ALI BABA AND THE FORTY THIEVES                         236

Cassim ... was so alarmed at the danger he was in that the
more he endeavoured to remember the word _Sesame_ the more
his memory was confounded

THE HISTORY OF CODADAD AND HIS BROTHERS                             276

As it drew near we saw ten or twelve armed pirates appear on the deck

SECOND VOYAGE OF SINBAD                                             300

The spot where she left me was encompassed on all sides by mountains
that seemed to reach above the clouds, and so steep that
there was no possibility of getting out of the valley

THIRD VOYAGE OF SINBAD                                              306

Having finished his repast, he returned to his porch, where he lay
and fell asleep, snoring louder than thunder




THE ARABIAN NIGHTS

   "When the breeze of a joyful dawn blew free
   In the silken sail of infancy,
   The tide of time flow'd back with me,
     The forward-flowing time of time;
   And many a sheeny summer morn,
   Adown the Tigris I was borne,
   By Bagdat's shrines of fretted gold,
   High-walled gardens green and old;
     True Mussulman was I and sworn,
       For it was in the golden prime
         Of good Haroun Alraschid.

   "Anight my shallop, rustling thro'
     The low and bloomèd foliage, drove
     The fragrant, glistening deeps, and clove
   The citron-shadows in the blue:
     By garden porches on the brim,
   The costly doors flung open wide,
     Gold glittering thro' lamplight dim,
   And broider'd sofas on each side:
     In sooth it was a goodly time,
     For it was in the golden prime
       Of good Haroun Alraschid."

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.




THE TALKING BIRD, THE SINGING TREE, AND THE GOLDEN WATER


There was an emperor of Persia named Kosrouschah, who, when he first
came to his crown, in order to obtain a knowledge of affairs, took great
pleasure in night excursions, attended by a trusty minister. He often
walked in disguise through the city, and met with many adventures, one
of the most remarkable of which happened to him upon his first ramble,
which was not long after his accession to the throne of his father.

After the ceremonies of his father's funeral rites and his own
inauguration were over, the new sultan, as well from inclination as from
duty, went out one evening attended by his grand vizier, disguised like
himself, to observe what was transacting in the city. As he was passing
through a street in that part of the town inhabited only by the meaner
sort, he heard some people talking very loud; and going close to the
house whence the noise proceeded, and looking through a crack in the
door, perceived a light, and three sisters sitting on a sofa, conversing
together after supper. By what the eldest said he presently understood
the subject of their conversation was wishes: "for," said she, "since we
are talking about wishes, mine shall be to have the sultan's baker for
my husband, for then I shall eat my fill of that bread, which by way of
excellence is called the sultan's; let us see if your tastes are as good
as mine." "For my part," replied the second sister, "I wish I was wife
to the sultan's chief cook, for then I should eat of the most excellent
dishes; and as I am persuaded that the sultan's bread is common in the
palace, I should not want any of that; therefore you see," addressing
herself to her eldest sister, "that I have a better taste than you." The
youngest sister, who was very beautiful, and had more charms and wit
than the two elder, spoke in her turn: "For my part, sisters," said she,
"I shall not limit my desires to such trifles, but take a higher flight;
and since we are upon wishing, I wish to be the emperor's queen-consort.
I would make him father of a prince, whose hair should be gold on one
side of his head, and silver on the other; when he cried, the tears from
his eyes should be pearls; and when he smiled, his vermilion lips should
look like a rosebud fresh-blown."

The three sisters' wishes, particularly that of the youngest, seemed so
singular to the sultan, that he resolved to gratify them in their
desires; but without communicating his design to his grand vizier, he
charged him only to take notice of the house, and bring the three
sisters before him the following day.

The grand vizier, in executing the emperor's orders, would but just give
the sisters time to dress themselves to appear before his majesty,
without telling them the reason. He brought them to the palace, and
presented them to the emperor, who said to them, "Do you remember the
wishes you expressed last night, when you were all in so pleasant a
mood? Speak the truth; I must know what they were." At these unexpected
words of the emperor, the three sisters were much confounded. They cast
down their eyes and blushed, and the colour which rose in the cheeks of
the youngest quite captivated the emperor's heart. Modesty, and fear
lest they might have offended by their conversation, kept them silent.
The emperor, perceiving their confusion, said to encourage them, "Fear
nothing, I did not send for you to distress you; and since I see that
without my intending it, this is the effect of the question I asked, as
I know the wish of each, I will relieve you from your fears. You," added
he, "who wished to be my wife, shall have your desire this day; and
you," continued he, addressing himself to the two elder sisters, "shall
also be married to my chief baker and cook."

As soon as the sultan had declared his pleasure, the youngest sister,
setting her elders an example, threw herself at the emperor's feet to
express her gratitude. "Sir," said she, "my wish, since it is come to
your majesty's knowledge, was expressed only in the way of conversation
and amusement. I am unworthy of the honour you do me, and supplicate
your pardon for my presumption." The other two sisters would have
excused themselves also, but the emperor, interrupting them, said, "No,
no; it shall be as I have declared; the wishes of all shall be
fulfilled." The nuptials were all celebrated that day, as the emperor
had resolved, but in a different manner. The youngest sister's were
solemnized with all the rejoicings usual at the marriages of the
emperors of Persia; and those of the other two sisters according to the
quality and distinction of their husbands; the one as the sultan's chief
baker, and the other as head cook.

The two elder felt strongly the disproportion of their marriages to that
of their younger sister. This consideration made them far from being
content, though they were arrived at the utmost height of their late
wishes, and much beyond their hopes. They gave themselves up to an
excess of jealousy, which not only disturbed their joy, but was the
cause of great trouble and affliction to the queen-consort, their
younger sister. They had not an opportunity to communicate their
thoughts to each other on the preference the emperor had given her, but
were altogether employed in preparing themselves for the celebration of
their marriages. Some days afterward, when they had an opportunity of
seeing each other at the public baths, the eldest said to the other:
"Well, what say you to our sister's great fortune? Is not she a fine
person to be a queen!" "I must own," said the other sister, "I cannot
conceive what charms the emperor could discover to be so bewitched by
her. Was it a reason sufficient for him not to cast his eyes on you,
because she was somewhat younger? You were as worthy of his throne, and
in justice he ought to have preferred you."

"Sister," said the elder, "I should not have regretted if his majesty
had but pitched upon you; but that he should choose that little
simpleton really grieves me. But I will revenge myself; and you, I
think, are as much concerned as I; therefore, I propose that we should
contrive measures and act in concert: communicate to me what you think
the likeliest way to mortify her, while I, on my side, will inform you
what my desire of revenge shall suggest to me." After this wicked
agreement, the two sisters saw each other frequently, and consulted how
they might disturb and interrupt the happiness of the queen. They
proposed a great many ways, but in deliberating about the manner of
executing them, found so many difficulties that they durst not attempt
them. In the meantime, with a detestable dissimulation, they often went
together to make her visits, and every time showed her all the marks of
affection they could devise, to persuade her how overjoyed they were to
have a sister raised to so high a fortune. The queen, on her part,
constantly received them with all the demonstrations of esteem they
could expect from so near a relative. Some time after her marriage, the
expected birth of an heir gave great joy to the queen and emperor, which
was communicated to all the court, and spread throughout the empire.
Upon this news the two sisters came to pay their compliments, and
proffered their services, desiring her, if not provided with nurses, to
accept of them.

The queen said to them most obligingly: "Sisters, I should desire
nothing more, if it were in my power to make the choice. I am, however,
obliged to you for your goodwill, but must submit to what the emperor
shall order on this occasion. Let your husbands employ their friends to
make interest, and get some courtier to ask this favour of his majesty,
and if he speaks to me about it, be assured that I shall not only
express the pleasure he does me but thank him for making choice of you."

The two husbands applied themselves to some courtiers, their patrons,
and begged of them to use their interest to procure their wives the
honour they aspired to. Those patrons exerted themselves so much in
their behalf that the emperor promised them to consider of the matter,
and was as good as his word; for in conversation with the queen he told
her that he thought her sisters were the most proper persons to be about
her, but would not name them before he had asked her consent. The queen,
sensible of the deference the emperor so obligingly paid her, said to
him, "Sir, I was prepared to do as your majesty might please to command.
But since you have been so kind as to think of my sisters, I thank you
for the regard you have shown them for my sake, and therefore I shall
not dissemble that I had rather have them than strangers." The emperor
therefore named the queen's two sisters to be her attendants; and from
that time they went frequently to the palace, overjoyed at the
opportunity they would have of executing the detestable wickedness they
had meditated against the queen.

Shortly afterward a young prince, as bright as the day, was born to the
queen; but neither his innocence nor beauty could move the cruel hearts
of the merciless sisters. They wrapped him up carelessly in his cloths
and put him into a basket, which they abandoned to the stream of a small
canal that ran under the queen's apartment, and declared that she had
given birth to a puppy. This dreadful intelligence was announced to the
emperor, who became so angry at the circumstance, that he was likely to
have occasioned the queen's death, if his grand vizier had not
represented to him that he could not, without injustice, make her
answerable for the misfortune.

In the meantime, the basket in which the little prince was exposed was
carried by the stream beyond a wall which bounded the prospect of the
queen's apartment, and from thence floated with the current down the
gardens. By chance the intendant of the emperor's gardens, one of the
principal officers of the kingdom, was walking in the garden by the side
of this canal, and, perceiving a basket floating, called to a gardener
who was not far off, to bring it to shore that he might see what it
contained. The gardener, with a rake which he had in his hand, drew the
basket to the side of the canal, took it up, and gave it to him. The
intendant of the gardens was extremely surprised to see in the basket a
child, which, though he knew it could be but just born, had very fine
features. This officer had been married several years, but though he had
always been desirous of having children, Heaven had never blessed him
with any. This accident interrupted his walk: he made the gardener
follow him with the child, and when he came to his own house, which was
situated at the entrance to the gardens of the palace, went into his
wife's apartment. "Wife," said he, "as we have no children of our own,
God has sent us one. I recommend him to you; provide him a nurse, and
take as much care of him as if he were our own son; for, from this
moment, I acknowledge him as such." The intendant's wife received the
child with great joy, and took particular pleasure in the care of him.
The intendant himself would not inquire too narrowly whence the infant
came. He saw plainly it came not far off from the queen's apartment, but
it was not his business to examine too closely into what had passed, nor
to create disturbances in a place where peace was so necessary.

The following year another prince was born, on whom the unnatural
sisters had no more compassion than on his brother, but exposed him
likewise in a basket and set him adrift in the canal, pretending, this
time, that the sultana had given birth to a cat. It was happy also for
this child that the intendant of the gardens was walking by the canal
side, for he had it carried to his wife, and charged her to take as much
care of it as of the former, which was as agreeable to her inclination
as it was to his own.

The emperor of Persia was more enraged this time against the queen than
before, and she had felt the effects of his anger if the grand vizier's
remonstrances had not prevailed. The third year the queen gave birth to
a princess, which innocent babe underwent the same fate as her brothers,
for the two sisters, being determined not to desist from their
detestable schemes till they had seen the queen cast off and humbled,
claimed that a log of wood had been born and exposed this infant also on
the canal. But the princess, as well as her brothers, was preserved from
death by the compassion and charity of the intendant of the gardens.

Kosrouschah could no longer contain himself, when he was informed of the
new misfortune. He pronounced sentence of death upon the wretched queen
and ordered the grand vizier to see it executed.

The grand vizier and the courtiers who were present cast themselves at
the emperor's feet, to beg of him to revoke the sentence. "Your majesty,
I hope, will give me leave," said the grand vizier, "to represent to
you, that the laws which condemn persons to death were made to punish
crimes; the three extraordinary misfortunes of the queen are not crimes,
for in what can she be said to have contributed toward them? Your
majesty may abstain from seeing her, but let her live. The affliction in
which she will spend the rest of her life, after the loss of your
favour, will be a punishment sufficiently distressing."

The emperor of Persia considered with himself, and, reflecting that it
was unjust to condemn the queen to death for what had happened, said:
"Let her live then; I will spare her life, but it shall be on this
condition: that she shall desire to die more than once every day. Let a
wooden shed be built for her at the gate of the principal mosque, with
iron bars to the windows, and let her be put into it, in the coarsest
habit; and every Mussulman that shall go into the mosque to prayers
shall heap scorn upon her. If any one fail, I will have him exposed to
the same punishment; and that I may be punctually obeyed, I charge you,
vizier, to appoint persons to see this done." The emperor pronounced his
sentence in such a tone that the grand vizier durst not further
remonstrate; and it was executed, to the great satisfaction of the two
envious sisters. A shed was built, and the queen, truly worthy of
compassion, was put into it and exposed ignominiously to the contempt of
the people, which usage she bore with a patient resignation that excited
the compassion of those who were discriminating and judged of things
better than the vulgar.

The two princes and the princess were, in the meantime, nursed and
brought up by the intendant of the gardens and his wife with the
tenderness of a father and mother; and as they advanced in age, they all
showed marks of superior dignity, which discovered itself every day by a
certain air which could only belong to exalted birth. All this increased
the affections of the intendant and his wife, who called the eldest
prince Bahman, and the second Perviz, both of them names of the most
ancient emperors of Persia, and the princess, Periezade, which name also
had been borne by several queens and princesses of the kingdom.

As soon as the two princes were old enough, the intendant provided
proper masters to teach them to read and write; and the princess, their
sister, who was often with them, showing a great desire to learn, the
intendant, pleased with her quickness, employed the same master to teach
her also. Her vivacity and piercing wit made her, in a little time, as
great a proficient as her brothers. From that time the brothers and
sister had the same masters in geography, poetry, history, and even the
secret sciences, and made so wonderful a progress that their tutors were
amazed, and frankly owned that they could teach them nothing more. At
the hours of recreation, the princess learned to sing and play upon all
sorts of instruments; and when the princes were learning to ride she
would not permit them to have that advantage over her, but went through
all the exercises with them, learning to ride also, to bend the bow, and
dart the reed or javelin, and oftentimes outdid them in the race and
other contests of agility.

The intendant of the gardens was so overjoyed to find his adopted
children so accomplished in all the perfections of body and mind, and
that they so well requited the expense he had been at in their
education, that he resolved to be at a still greater; for, as he had
until then been content simply with his lodge at the entrance of the
garden, and kept no country-house, he purchased a mansion at a short
distance from the city, surrounded by a large tract of arable land,
meadows, and woods. As the house was not sufficiently handsome nor
convenient, he pulled it down, and spared no expense in building a more
magnificent residence. He went every day to hasten, by his presence, the
great number of workmen he employed, and as soon as there was an
apartment ready to receive him, passed several days together there when
his presence was not necessary at court; and by the same exertions, the
interior was furnished in the richest manner, in consonance with the
magnificence of the edifice. Afterward he made gardens, according to a
plan drawn by himself. He took in a large extent of ground, which he
walled around, and stocked with fallow deer, that the princes and
princess might divert themselves with hunting when they chose.

When this country seat was finished and fit for habitation, the
intendant of the gardens went and cast himself at the emperor's feet,
and, after representing how long he had served, and the infirmities of
age which he found growing upon him, begged that he might be permitted
to resign his charge into his majesty's disposal and retire. The emperor
gave him leave, with the more pleasure, because he was satisfied with
his long services, both in his father's reign and his own, and when he
granted it, asked what he should do to recompense him. "Sir," replied
the intendant of the gardens, "I have received so many obligations from
your majesty and the late emperor, your father, of happy memory, that I
desire no more than the honour of dying in your favour." He took his
leave of the emperor and retired with the two princes and the princess
to the country retreat he had built. His wife had been dead some years,
and he himself had not lived above six months with his charges before he
was surprised by so sudden a death that he had not time to give them the
least account of the manner in which he had discovered them. The Princes
Bahman and Perviz, and the Princess Periezade, who knew no other father
than the intendant of the emperor's gardens, regretted and bewailed him
as such, and paid all the honours in his funeral obsequies which love
and filial gratitude required of them. Satisfied with the plentiful
fortune he had left them, they lived together in perfect union, free
from the ambition of distinguishing themselves at court, or aspiring to
places of honour and dignity, which they might easily have obtained.

One day when the two princes were hunting, and the princess had remained
at home, a religious old woman came to the gate, and desired leave to go
in to say her prayers, it being then the hour. The servants asked the
princess's permission, who ordered them to show her into the oratory,
which the intendant of the emperor's gardens had taken care to fit up in
his house, for want of a mosque in the neighbourhood. She bade them,
also, after the good woman had finished her prayers, to show her the
house and gardens and then bring her to the hall.

The old woman went into the oratory, said her prayers, and when she came
out two of the princess's women invited her to see the residence, which
civility she accepted, followed them from one apartment to another, and
observed, like a person who understood what belonged to furniture, the
nice arrangement of everything. They conducted her also into the garden,
the disposition of which she found so well planned, that she admired it,
observing that the person who had formed it must have been an excellent
master of his art. Afterward she was brought before the princess, who
waited for her in the great hall, which in beauty and richness exceeded
all that she had admired in the other apartments.

As soon as the princess saw the devout woman, she said to her: "My good
mother, come near and sit down by me. I am overjoyed at the happiness of
having the opportunity of profiting for some moments by the example and
conversation of such a person as you, who have taken the right way by
dedicating yourself to the service of God. I wish every one were as
wise."

The devout woman, instead of sitting on a sofa, would only sit upon the
edge of one. The princess would not permit her to do so, but rising from
her seat and taking her by the hand, obliged her to come and sit by her.
The good woman, sensible of the civility, said: "Madam, I ought not to
have so much respect shown me; but since you command, and are mistress
of your own house, I will obey you." When she had seated herself, before
they entered into any conversation, one of the princess's women brought
a low stand of mother-of-pearl and ebony, with a china dish full of
cakes upon it, and many others set round it full of fruits in season,
and wet and dry sweetmeats.

The princess took up one of the cakes, and presenting her with it, said:
"Eat, good mother, and make choice of what you like best; you had need
to eat after coming so far." "Madam," replied the good woman, "I am not
used to eat such delicacies, but will not refuse what God has sent me by
so liberal a hand as yours."

While the devout woman was eating, the princess ate a little too, to
bear her company, and asked her many questions upon the exercise of
devotion which she practised and how she lived; all of which she
answered with great modesty. Talking of various things, at last the
princess asked her what she thought of the house, and how she liked it.

"Madam," answered the devout woman, "I must certainly have very bad
taste to disapprove anything in it, since it is beautiful, regular, and
magnificently furnished with exactness and judgment, and all its
ornaments adjusted in the best manner. Its situation is an agreeable
spot, and no garden can be more delightful; but yet, if you will give me
leave to speak my mind freely, I will take the liberty to tell you that
this house would be incomparable if it had three things which are
wanting to complete it." "My good mother," replied the Princess
Periezade, "what are those? I entreat you to tell me what they are; I
will spare nothing to get them."

"Madam," replied the devout woman, "the first of these three things is
the Talking Bird, so singular a creature, that it draws round it all the
songsters of the neighbourhood which come to accompany its voice. The
second is the Singing Tree, the leaves of which are so many mouths which
form an harmonious concert of different voices and never cease. The
third is the Golden Water, a single drop of which being poured into a
vessel properly prepared, it increases so as to fill it immediately, and
rises up in the middle like a fountain, which continually plays, and yet
the basin never overflows."

"Ah! my good mother," cried the princess, "how much am I obliged to you
for the knowledge of these curiosities! I never before heard there were
such rarities in the world; but as I am persuaded that you know, I
expect that you should do me the favour to inform me where they are to
be found."

"Madam," replied the good woman, "I should be unworthy the hospitality
you have shown me if I should refuse to satisfy your curiosity on that
point, and am glad to have the honour to tell you that these curiosities
are all to be met with in the same spot on the confines of this kingdom,
toward India. The road lies before your house, and whoever you send
needs but follow it for twenty days, and on the twentieth only let him
ask the first person he meets where the Talking Bird, the Singing Tree,
and the Golden Water are, and he will be informed." After saying this,
she rose from her seat, took her leave, and went her way.

The Princess Periezade's thoughts were so taken up with the Talking
Bird, Singing Tree, and Golden Water, that she never perceived the
devout woman's departure, till she wanted to ask her some question for
her better information; for she thought that what she had been told was
not a sufficient reason for exposing herself by undertaking a long
journey. However, she would not send after her visitor, but endeavoured
to remember all the directions, and when she thought she had recollected
every word, took real pleasure in thinking of the satisfaction she
should have if she could get these curiosities into her possession; but
the difficulties she apprehended and the fear of not succeeding made her
very uneasy.

She was absorbed in these thoughts when her brothers returned from
hunting, who, when they entered the great hall, instead of finding her
lively and gay, as she was wont to be, were amazed to see her so pensive
and hanging down her head as if something troubled her.

"Sister," said Prince Bahman, "what is become of all your mirth and
gaiety? Are you not well? or has some misfortune befallen you? Tell us,
that we may know how to act, and give you some relief. If any one has
affronted you, we will resent his insolence."

The princess remained in the same posture some time without answering,
but at last lifted up her eyes to look at her brothers, and then held
them down again, telling them nothing disturbed her.

"Sister," said Prince Bahman, "you conceal the truth from us; there must
be something of consequence. It is impossible we could observe so sudden
a change if nothing was the matter with you. You would not have us
satisfied with the evasive answer you have given; do not conceal
anything, unless you would have us suspect that you renounce the strict
union which has hitherto subsisted between us."

The princess, who had not the smallest intention to offend her brothers,
would not suffer them to entertain such a thought, but said: "When I
told you nothing disturbed me, I meant nothing that was of importance to
you, but to me it is of some consequence; and since you press me to tell
you by our strict union and friendship, which are so dear to me, I will.
You think, and I always believed so too, that this house was so complete
that nothing was wanting. But this day I have learned that it lacks
three rarities which would render it so perfect that no country seat in
the world could be compared with it. These three things are the Talking
Bird, the Singing Tree, and the Golden Water." After she had informed
them wherein consisted the excellency of these rarities, "A devout
woman," added she, "has made this discovery to me, told me the place
where they are to be found, and the way thither. Perhaps you may imagine
these things of little consequence; that without these additions our
house will always be thought sufficiently elegant, and that we can do
without them. You may think as you please, but I cannot help telling you
that I am persuaded they are absolutely necessary, and I shall not be
easy without them. Therefore, whether you value them or not, I desire
you to consider what person you may think proper for me to send in
search of the curiosities I have mentioned."

"Sister," replied Prince Bahman, "nothing can concern you in which we
have not an equal interest. It is enough that you desire these things to
oblige us to take the same interest; but if you had not, we feel
ourselves inclined of our own accord and for our own individual
satisfaction. I am persuaded my brother is of the same opinion, and
therefore we ought to undertake this conquest, for the importance and
singularity of the undertaking deserve that name. I will take the charge
upon myself; only tell me the place and the way to it, and I will defer
my journey no longer than till to-morrow."

"Brother," said Prince Perviz, "it is not proper that you, who are the
head of our family, should be absent. I desire my sister should join
with me to oblige you to abandon your design, and allow me to undertake
it. I hope to acquit myself as well as you, and it will be a more
regular proceeding." "I am persuaded of your goodwill, brother," replied
Prince Bahman, "and that you would succeed as well as myself in this
journey; but I have resolved and will undertake it. You shall stay at
home with our sister, and I need not recommend her to you."

The next morning Bahman mounted his horse, and Perviz and the princess
embraced and wished him a good journey. But in the midst of their
adieus, the princess recollected what she had not thought of before.
"Brother," said she, "I had quite forgotten the accidents which attend
travellers. Who knows whether I shall ever see you again? Alight, I
beseech you, and give up this journey. I would rather be deprived of the
sight and possession of the Talking Bird, the Singing Tree, and the
Golden Water, than run the risk of never seeing you more."

"Sister," replied Bahman, smiling at her sudden fears, "my resolution is
fixed. The accidents you speak of befall only those who are unfortunate;
but there are more who are not so. However, as events are uncertain, and
I may fail in this undertaking, all I can do is to leave you this
knife."

Bahman pulling a knife from his vestband, and presenting it to the
princess in the sheath, said: "Take this knife, sister, and give
yourself the trouble sometimes to pull it out of the sheath; while you
see it clean as it is now, it will be a sign that I am alive; but if you
find it stained with blood, then you may believe me dead and indulge me
with your prayers."

The princess could obtain nothing more of Bahman. He bade adieu to her
and Prince Perviz for the last time and rode away. When he got into the
road, he never turned to the right hand nor to the left, but went
directly forward toward India. The twentieth day he perceived on the
roadside a hideous old man, who sat under a tree near a thatched house,
which was his retreat from the weather.

His eyebrows were as white as snow, as was also the hair of his head;
his whiskers covered his mouth, and his beard and hair reached down to
his feet. The nails of his hands and feet were grown to an extensive
length, while a flat, broad umbrella covered his head. He had no
clothes, but only a mat thrown round his body. This old man was a
dervish for so many years retired from the world to give himself up
entirely to the service of God that at last he had become what we have
described.

Prince Bahman, who had been all that morning very attentive, to see if
he could meet with anybody who could give him information of the place
he was in search of, stopped when he came near the dervish, alighted, in
conformity to the directions which the devout woman had given the
Princess Periezade, and leading his horse by the bridle, advanced toward
him and saluting him, said: "God prolong your days, good father, and
grant you the accomplishment of your desires."

The dervish returned the prince's salutation, but so unintelligibly that
he could not understand one word he said and Prince Bahman, perceiving
that this difficulty proceeded from the dervish's whiskers hanging over
his mouth, and unwilling to go any further without the instructions he
wanted, pulled out a pair of scissors he had about him, and having tied
his horse to a branch of the tree, said: "Good dervish, I want to have
some talk with you, but your whiskers prevent my understanding what you
say; and if you will consent, I will cut off some part of them and of
your eyebrows, which disfigure you so much that you look more like a
bear than a man."

The dervish did not oppose the offer, and when the prince had cut off as
much hair as he thought fit, he perceived that the dervish had a good
complexion, and that he was not as old as he seemed. "Good dervish,"
said he, "if I had a glass I would show you how young you look: you are
now a man, but before, nobody could tell what you were."

The kind behaviour of Prince Bahman made the dervish smile and return
his compliment. "Sir," said he, "whoever you are, I am obliged by the
good office you have performed, and am ready to show my gratitude by
doing anything in my power for you. You must have alighted here upon
some account or other. Tell me what it is, and I will endeavour to serve
you."

"Good dervish," replied Prince Bahman, "I am in search of the Talking
Bird, the Singing Tree, and the Golden Water; I know these three
rarities are not far from hence, but cannot tell exactly the place where
they are to be found; if you know, I conjure you to show me the way,
that I may not lose my labour after so long a journey."

The prince, while he spoke, observed that the dervish changed
countenance, held down his eyes, looked very serious, and remained
silent, which obliged him to say to him again: "Good father, tell me
whether you know what I ask you, that I may not lose my time, but inform
myself somewhere else."

At last the dervish broke silence. "Sir," said he to Prince Bahman, "I
know the way you ask of me; but the regard which I conceived for you the
first moment I saw you, and which is grown stronger by the service you
have done me, kept me in suspense as to whether I should give you the
satisfaction you desire." "What motive can hinder you?" replied the
prince; "and what difficulties do you find in so doing?" "I will tell
you," replied the dervish; "the danger to which you are going to expose
yourself is greater than you may suppose. A number of gentlemen of as
much bravery as you can possibly possess have passed this way, and asked
me the same question. When I had used all my endeavours to persuade them
to desist, they would not believe me; at last I yielded to their
importunities; I was compelled to show them the way, and I can assure
you they have all perished, for I have not seen one come back.
Therefore, if you have any regard for your life, take my advice, go no
farther, but return home."

Prince Bahman persisted in his resolution. "I will not suppose," said he
to the dervish, "but that your advice is sincere. I am obliged to you
for the friendship you express for me; but whatever may be the danger,
nothing shall make me change my intention: whoever attacks me, I am well
armed, and can say I am as brave as any one." "But they who will attack
you are not to be seen," replied the dervish; "how will you defend
yourself against invisible persons?" "It is no matter," answered the
prince, "all you say shall not persuade me to do anything contrary to my
duty. Since you know the way, I conjure you once more to inform me."

When the dervish found he could not prevail upon Prince Bahman, and that
he was obstinately bent to pursue his journey, notwithstanding his
friendly remonstrance, he put his hand into a bag that lay by him and
pulled out a bowl, which he presented to him. "Since I cannot prevail on
you to attend to my advice," said he, "take this bowl and when you are
on horseback throw it before you, and follow it to the foot of a
mountain, where it will stop. As soon as the bowl stops, alight, leave
your horse with the bridle over his neck, and he will stand in the same
place till you return. As you ascend you will see on your right and
left a great number of large black stones, and will hear on all sides a
confusion of voices, which will utter a thousand abuses to discourage
you, and prevent your reaching the summit of the mountain. Be not
afraid; but, above all things, do not turn your head to look behind you,
for in that instant you will be changed into such a black stone as those
you see, which are all youths who have failed in this enterprise. If you
escape the danger of which I give you but a faint idea, and get to the
top of the mountain, you will see a cage, and in that cage is the bird
you seek; ask him which are the Singing Tree and the Golden Water, and
he will tell you. I have nothing more to say; this is what you have to
do, and if you are prudent you will take my advice and not expose your
life. Consider once more while you have time that the difficulties are
almost insuperable."

"I am obliged to you for your advice," replied Prince Bahman, after he
had received the bowl, "but cannot follow it. However, I will endeavour
to conform myself to that part of it which bids me not to look behind
me, and I hope to come and thank you when I have obtained what I am
seeking." After these words, to which the dervish made no other answer
than that he should be overjoyed to see him again, the prince mounted
his horse, took leave of the dervish with a respectful salute, and threw
the bowl before him.

The bowl rolled away with as much swiftness as when Prince Bahman first
hurled it from his hand, which obliged him to put his horse to the same
pace to avoid losing sight of it, and when it had reached the foot of
the mountain it stopped. The prince alighted from his horse, laid the
bridle on his neck, and having first surveyed the mountain and seen the
black stones, began to ascend, but had not gone four steps before he
heard the voices mentioned by the dervish, though he could see nobody.
Some said: "Where is that fool going? Where is he going? What would he
have? Do not let him pass." Others: "Stop him, catch him, kill him:" and
others with a voice like thunder: "Thief! assassin! murderer!" while
some in a gibing tone cried: "No, no, do not hurt him; let the pretty
fellow pass, the cage and bird are kept for him."

Notwithstanding all these troublesome voices, Prince Bahman ascended
with resolution for some time, but the voices redoubled with so loud a
din, both behind and before, that at last he was seized with dread, his
legs trembled under him, he staggered, and finding that his strength
failed him, he forgot the dervish's advice, turned about to run down the
hill, and was that instant changed into a black stone; a metamorphosis
which had happened to many before him who had attempted the ascent. His
horse, likewise, underwent the same change.

From the time of Prince Bahman's departure, the Princess Periezade
always wore the knife and sheath in her girdle, and pulled it out
several times in a day, to know whether her brother was alive. She had
the consolation to understand he was in perfect health and to talk of
him frequently with Prince Perviz. On the fatal day that Prince Bahman
was transformed into a stone, as Prince Perviz and the princess were
talking together in the evening, as usual, the prince desired his sister
to pull out the knife to know how their brother did. The princess
readily complied, and seeing the blood run down the point was seized
with so much horror that she threw it down. "Ah! my dear brother," cried
she, "I have been the cause of your death, and shall never see you more!
Why did I tell you of the Talking Bird, Singing Tree, and Golden Water;
or rather, of what importance was it to me to know whether the devout
woman thought this house ugly or handsome, or complete or not? I wish
to Heaven she had never addressed herself to me!"

Prince Perviz was as much afflicted at the death of Prince Bahman as the
princess, but not to waste time in needless regret, as he knew that she
still passionately desired possession of the marvellous treasures, he
interrupted her, saying: "Sister, our regret for our brother is vain;
our lamentations cannot restore him to life; it is the will of God; we
must submit and adore the decrees of the Almighty without searching into
them. Why should you now doubt of the truth of what the holy woman told
you? Do you think she spoke to you of three things that were not in
being, and that she invented them to deceive you who had received her
with so much goodness and civility? Let us rather believe that our
brother's death is owing to some error on his part, or some accident
which we cannot conceive. It ought not therefore to prevent us from
pursuing our object. I offered to go this journey, and am now more
resolved than ever; his example has no effect upon my resolution;
to-morrow I will depart."

The princess did all she could to dissuade Prince Perviz, conjuring him
not to expose her to the danger of losing two brothers; but he was
obstinate, and all the remonstrances she could urge had no effect upon
him. Before he went, that she might know what success he had, he left
her a string of a hundred pearls, telling her that if they would not run
when she should count them upon the string, but remain fixed, that would
be a certain sign he had undergone the same fate as his brother; but at
the same time told her he hoped it would never happen, but that he
should have the delight of seeing her again.

Prince Perviz, on the twentieth day after his departure, met the same
dervish in the same place as his brother Bahman had done before him. He
went directly up to him, and after he had saluted, asked him if he
could tell him where to find the Talking Bird, the Singing Tree, and the
Golden Water. The dervish urged the same remonstrances as he had done to
Prince Bahman, telling him that a young gentleman, who very much
resembled him, was with him a short time before; that, overcome by his
importunity, he had shown him the way, given him a guide, and told him
how he should act to succeed, but that he had not seen him since, and
doubted not but he had shared the same fate as all other adventurers.

"Good dervish," answered Prince Perviz, "I know whom you speak of; he
was my elder brother, and I am informed of the certainty of his death,
but know not the cause." "I can tell you," replied the dervish; "he was
changed into a black stone, as all I speak of have been; and you must
expect the same transformation, unless you observe more exactly than he
has done the advice I gave him, in case you persist in your resolution,
which I once more entreat you to renounce."

"Dervish," said Prince Perviz, "I cannot sufficiently express how much I
am obliged for the concern you take in my life, who am a stranger to
you, and have done nothing to deserve your kindness; but I thoroughly
considered this enterprise before I undertook it; therefore I beg of you
to do me the same favour you have done my brother. Perhaps I may have
better success in following your directions." "Since I cannot prevail
with you," said the dervish, "to give up your obstinate resolution, if
my age did not prevent me, and I could stand, I would get up to reach
you a bowl I have here, which will show you the way."

Without giving the dervish time to say more, the prince alighted from
his horse and went to the dervish, who had taken a bowl out of his bag,
in which he had a great many, and gave it him, with the same directions
he had given Prince Bahman; and after warning him not to be discouraged
by the voices he should hear, however threatening they might be, but to
continue his way up the hill till he saw the cage and bird, he let him
depart.

Prince Perviz thanked the dervish, and when he had remounted and taken
leave, threw the bowl before his horse, and spurring him at the same
time, followed it. When the bowl came to the bottom of the hill it
stopped, the prince alighted, and stood some time to recollect the
dervish's directions. He encouraged himself, and began to walk up with a
resolution to reach the summit; but before he had gone above six steps,
he heard a voice, which seemed to be near, as of a man behind him, say
in an insulting tone: "Stay, rash youth, that I may punish you for your
presumption."

Upon this affront the prince, forgetting the dervish's advice, clapped
his hand upon his sword, drew it, and turned about to revenge himself;
but had scarcely time to see that nobody followed him before he and his
horse were changed into black stones.

In the meantime the Princess Periezade, several times a day after her
brother's departure, counted her chaplet. She did not omit it at night,
but when she went to bed put it about her neck, and in the morning when
she awoke counted over the pearls again to see if they would slide.

The day that Prince Perviz was transformed into a stone she was counting
over the pearls as she used to do, when all at once they became
immovably fixed, a certain token that the prince, her brother, was dead.
As she had determined what to do in case it should so happen, she lost
no time in outward demonstrations of grief, which she concealed as much
as possible, but having disguised herself in man's apparel, she mounted
her horse the next morning, armed and equipped, having told her servants
she should return in two or three days, and took the same road that her
brothers had done.

The princess, who had been used to ride on horseback in hunting,
supported the fatigue of so long a journey better than most ladies could
have done; and as she made the same stages as her brothers, she also met
with the dervish on the twentieth day. When she came near him, she
alighted from her horse, leading him by the bridle, went and sat down by
the dervish, and after she had saluted him, said: "Good dervish, give me
leave to rest myself; and do me the favour to tell me if you have not
heard that there are somewhere in this neighbourhood a Talking Bird, a
Singing Tree, and Golden Water."

"Princess," answered the dervish, "for so I must call you, since by your
voice I know you to be a woman disguised in man's apparel, I know the
place well where these things are to be found; but what makes you ask me
this question?"

"Good dervish," replied the princess, "I have had such a flattering
relation of them given me, that I have a great desire to possess them."
"Madam," replied the dervish, "you have been told the truth. These
curiosities are more singular than they have been represented, but you
have not been made acquainted with the difficulties which must be
surmounted in order to obtain them. If you had been fully informed of
these, you would not have undertaken so dangerous an enterprise. Take my
advice, return, and do not urge me to contribute toward your ruin."

"Good father," said the princess, "I have travelled a great way, and
should be sorry to return without executing my design. You talk of
difficulties and danger of life, but you do not tell me what those
difficulties are, and wherein the danger consists. This is what I desire
to know, that I may consider and judge whether I can trust my courage
and strength to brave them."

The dervish repeated to the princess what he had said to the Princes
Bahman and Perviz, exaggerating the difficulties of climbing up to the
top of the mountain, where she was to make herself mistress of the Bird,
which would inform her of the Singing Tree and Golden Water. He
magnified the din of the terrible threatening voices which she would
hear on all sides of her, and the great number of black stones alone
sufficient to strike terror. He entreated her to reflect that those
stones were so many brave gentlemen, so metamorphosed for having omitted
to observe the principal condition of success in the perilous
undertaking, which was not to look behind them before they had got
possession of the cage.

When the dervish had done, the princess replied: "By what I comprehend
from your discourse, the difficulties of succeeding in this affair are,
first, the getting up to the cage without being frightened at the
terrible din of voices I shall hear; and, secondly, not to look behind
me. For this last, I hope I shall be mistress enough of myself to
observe it; as to the first, I own that voices, such as you represent
them to be, are capable of striking terror into the most undaunted; but
as in all enterprises and dangers every one may use stratagem, I desire
to know of you if I may use any in one of so great importance." "And
what stratagem is it you would employ?" said the dervish. "To stop my
ears with cotton," answered the princess, "that the voices, however
terrible, may make the less impression upon my imagination, and my mind
remain free from that disturbance which might cause me to lose the use
of my reason."

"Princess," replied the dervish, "of all the persons who have addressed
themselves to me for information, I do not know that ever one made use
of the contrivance you propose. All I know is that they all perished. If
you persist in your design, you may make the experiment. You will be
fortunate if it succeeds, but I would advise you not to expose yourself
to the danger."

"My good father," replied the princess, "I am sure my precaution will
succeed, and am resolved to try the experiment. Nothing remains for me
but to know which way I must go, and I conjure you not to deny me that
information." The dervish exhorted her again to consider well what she
was going to do; but finding her resolute, he took out a bowl, and
presenting it to her, said: "Take this bowl, mount your horse again, and
when you have thrown it before you, follow it through all its windings,
till it stops at the bottom of the mountain; there alight and ascend the
hill. Go, you know the rest."

After the princess had thanked the dervish, and taken her leave of him,
she mounted her horse, threw the bowl before her, and followed it till
it stopped at the foot of the mountain.

She then alighted, stopped her ears with cotton, and after she had well
examined the path leading to the summit began with a moderate pace and
walked up with intrepidity. She heard the voices and perceived the great
service the cotton was to her. The higher she went, the louder and more
numerous the voices seemed, but they were not capable of making any
impression upon her. She heard a great many affronting speeches and
raillery very disagreeable to a woman, which she only laughed at. "I
mind not," said she to herself, "all that can be said, were it worse; I
only laugh at them and shall pursue my way." At last, she climbed so
high that she could perceive the cage and the Bird which endeavoured, in
company with the voices, to frighten her, crying in a thundering tone,
notwithstanding the smallness of its size: "Retire, fool, and approach
no nearer."

The princess, encouraged by this sight, redoubled her speed, and by
effort gained the summit of the mountain, where the ground was level;
then running directly to the cage and clapping her hand upon it, cried:
"Bird, I have you, and you shall not escape me."

While Periezade was pulling the cotton out of her ears the Bird said to
her: "Heroic princess, be not angry with me for joining with those who
exerted themselves to preserve my liberty. Though in a cage, I was
content with my condition; but since I am destined to be a slave, I
would rather be yours than any other person's, since you have obtained
me so courageously. From this instant, I swear entire submission to all
your commands. I know who you are. You do not; but the time will come
when I shall do you essential service, for which I hope you will think
yourself obliged to me. As a proof of my sincerity, tell me what you
desire and I am ready to obey you."

The princess's joy was the more inexpressible, because the conquest she
had made had cost her the lives of two beloved brothers, and given her
more trouble and danger than she could have imagined. "Bird," said she,
"it was my intention to have told you that I wish for many things which
are of importance, but I am overjoyed that you have shown your goodwill
and prevented me. I have been told that there is not far off a Golden
Water, the property of which is very wonderful; before all things, I ask
you to tell me where it is." The Bird showed her the place, which was
just by, and she went and filled a little silver flagon which she had
brought with her. She returned at once and said: "Bird, this is not
enough; I want also the Singing Tree; tell me where it is." "Turn
about," said the Bird, "and you will see behind you a wood where you
will find the tree." The princess went into the wood, and by the
harmonious concert she heard, soon knew the tree among many others, but
it was very large and high. She came back again and said: "Bird, I have
found the Singing Tree, but I can neither pull it up by the roots nor
carry it." The Bird replied: "It is not necessary that you should take
it up; it will be sufficient to break off a branch and carry it to plant
in your garden; it will take root as soon as it is put into the earth,
and in a little time will grow to as fine a tree as that you have seen."

When the princess had obtained possession of the three things for which
she had conceived so great a desire, she said again: "Bird, what you
have yet done for me is not sufficient. You have been the cause of the
death of my two brothers, who must be among the black stones I saw as I
ascended the mountain. I wish to take the princes home with me."

The Bird seemed reluctant to satisfy the princess in this point, and
indeed made some difficulty to comply. "Bird," said the princess,
"remember you told me that you were my slave. You are so; and your life
is in my disposal." "That I cannot deny," answered the bird; "but
although what you now ask is more difficult than all the rest, yet I
will do it for you. Cast your eyes around," added he, "and look if you
can see a little pitcher." "I see it already," said the princess. "Take
it then," said he, "and as you descend the mountain, sprinkle a little
of the water that is in it upon every black stone."

The princess took up the pitcher accordingly, carried with her the cage
and Bird, the flagon of Golden Water, and the branch of the Singing
Tree, and as she descended the mountain, threw a little of the water on
every black stone, which was changed immediately into a man; and as she
did not miss one stone, all the horses, both of her brothers and of the
other gentlemen, resumed their natural forms also. She instantly
recognised Bahman and Perviz, as they did her, and ran to embrace her.
She returned their embraces and expressed her amazement. "What do you
here, my dear brothers?" said she, and they told her they had been
asleep. "Yes," replied she, "and if it had not been for me, perhaps you
might have slept till the day of judgment. Do not you remember that you
came to fetch the Talking Bird, the Singing Tree, and the Golden Water,
and did not you see, as you came along, the place covered with black
stones? Look and see if there be any now. The gentlemen and their horses
who surround us, and you yourselves, were these black stones. If you
desire to know how this wonder was performed," continued she, showing
the pitcher, which she set down at the foot of the mountain, "it was
done by virtue of the water which was in this pitcher, with which I
sprinkled every stone. After I had made the Talking Bird (which you see
in this cage) my slave, by his directions I found out the Singing Tree,
a branch of which I have now in my hand; and the Golden Water, with
which this flagon is filled; but being still unwilling to return without
taking you with me, I constrained the Bird, by the power I had over him,
to afford me the means. He told me where to find this pitcher, and the
use I was to make of it."

The Princes Bahman and Perviz learned by this relation the obligation
they had to their sister, as did all the other gentlemen, who expressed
to her that, far from envying her happiness in the conquest she had
made, and which they all had aspired to, they thought they could not
better express their gratitude for restoring them to life again, than by
declaring themselves her slaves, and that they were ready to obey her in
whatever she should command.

"Gentlemen," replied the princess, "if you had given any attention to my
words, you might have observed that I had no other intention in what I
have done than to recover my brothers; therefore, if you have received
any benefit, you owe me no obligation, and I have no further share
in your compliment than your politeness toward me, for which I return
you my thanks. In other respects, I regard each of you as quite as free
as you were before your misfortunes, and I rejoice with you at the
happiness which has accrued to you by my means. Let us, however, stay no
longer in a place where we have nothing to detain us, but mount our
horses and return to our respective homes."

[Illustration]

_It will be sufficient to break off a branch and carry it to plant in
your garden._

The princess took her horse, which stood in the place where she had left
him. Before she mounted, Prince Bahman desired her to give him the cage
to carry. "Brother," replied the princess, "the Bird is my slave and I
will carry him myself; if you will take the pains to carry the branch of
the Singing Tree, there it is; only hold the cage while I get on
horseback." When she had mounted her horse, and Prince Bahman had given
her the cage, she turned about and said to Prince Perviz: "I leave the
flagon of Golden Water to your care, if it will not be too much trouble
for you to carry it," and Prince Perviz accordingly took charge of it
with pleasure.

When Bahman, Perviz, and all the gentlemen had mounted their horses, the
princess waited for some of them to lead the way. The two princes paid
that compliment to the gentlemen, and they again to the princess, who,
finding that none of them would accept the honour, but that it was
reserved for her, addressed herself to them and said: "Gentlemen, I
expect that some of you should lead the way;" to which one who was
nearest to her, in the name of the rest, replied: "Madam, were we
ignorant of the respect due to your sex, yet after what you have done
for us there is no deference we would not willingly pay you,
notwithstanding your modesty; we entreat you no longer to deprive us of
the happiness of following you."

"Gentlemen," said the princess, "I do not deserve the honour you do me,
and accept it only because you desire it." At the same time she led the
way, and the two princes and the gentlemen followed.

This illustrious company called upon the dervish as they passed, to
thank him for his reception and wholesome advice, which they had all
found to be sincere. He was dead, however; whether of old age, or
because he was no longer necessary to show the way to obtaining the
three rarities, did not appear. They pursued their route, but lessened
in their numbers every day. The gentlemen who, as we said before, had
come from different countries, after severally repeating their
obligations to the princess and her brothers, took leave of them one
after another as they approached the road by which they had come.

As soon as the princess reached home, she placed the cage in the garden,
and the Bird no sooner began to warble than he was surrounded by
nightingales, chaffinches, larks, linnets, goldfinches, and every
species of birds of the country. The branch of the Singing Tree was no
sooner set in the midst of the parterre, a little distance from the
house, than it took root and in a short time became a large tree, the
leaves of which gave as harmonious a concert as those of the parent from
which it was gathered. A large basin of beautiful marble was placed in
the garden, and when it was finished, the princess poured into it all
the Golden Water from the flagon, which instantly increased and swelled
so much that it soon reached up to the edges of the basin, and afterward
formed in the middle a fountain twenty feet high, which fell again into
the basin perpetually, without running over.

The report of these wonders was presently spread abroad, and as the
gates of the house and those of the gardens were shut to nobody, a great
number of people came to admire them.

Some days after, when the Princes Bahman and Perviz had recovered from
the fatigue of their journey, they resumed their former way of living;
and as their usual diversion was hunting, they mounted their horses and
went for the first time since their return, not to their own demesne,
but two or three leagues from their house. As they pursued their sport,
the emperor of Persia came in pursuit of game upon the same ground. When
they perceived, by the number of horsemen in different places, that he
would soon be up, they resolved to discontinue their chase, and retire
to avoid encountering him; but in the very road they took they chanced
to meet him in so narrow a way that they could not retreat without being
seen. In their surprise they had only time to alight and prostrate
themselves before the emperor, without lifting up their heads to look at
him. The emperor, who saw they were as well mounted and dressed as if
they had belonged to his court, had a curiosity to see their faces. He
stopped and commanded them to rise. The princes rose up and stood before
him with an easy and graceful air, accompanied with modest countenances.
The emperor took some time to view them before he spoke, and after he
had admired their good air and mien, asked them who they were and where
they lived.

"Sir," said Prince Bahman, "we are the sons of the late intendant of
your majesty's gardens, and live in a house which he built a little
before he died, till we should be fit to serve your majesty and ask of
you some employ when opportunity offered."

"By what I perceive," replied the emperor, "you love hunting." "Sir,"
replied Prince Bahman, "it is our common exercise, and what none of your
majesty's subjects who intend to bear arms in your armies, ought,
according to the ancient custom of the kingdom, to neglect." The
emperor, charmed with so prudent an answer, said: "Since it is so, I
should be glad to see your expertness in the chase; choose your own
game."

The princes mounted their horses again and followed the emperor, but had
not gone far before they saw many wild beasts together. Prince Bahman
chose a lion and Prince Perviz a bear, and pursued them with so much
intrepidity that the emperor was surprised. They came up with their game
nearly at the same time, and darted their javelins with so much skill
and address that they pierced the one the lion and the other the bear so
effectually that the emperor saw them fall one after the other.
Immediately afterward Prince Bahman pursued another bear, and Prince
Perviz another lion, and killed them in a short time, and would have
beaten out for fresh game, but the emperor would not let them, and sent
to them to come to him. When they approached he said: "If I had given
you leave, you would soon have destroyed all my game; but it is not that
which I would preserve, but your persons; for I am so well assured your
bravery may one time or other be serviceable to me, that from this
moment your lives will be always dear to me."

The emperor, in short, conceived so great a kindness for the two
princes, that he invited them immediately to make him a visit, to which
Prince Bahman replied: "Your majesty does us an honour we do not
deserve, and we beg you will excuse us."

The emperor, who could not comprehend what reason the princes could have
to refuse this token of his favour, pressed them to tell him why they
excused themselves. "Sir," said Prince Bahman, "we have a sister younger
than ourselves, with whom we live in such perfect union, that we
undertake nothing before we consult her, nor she anything without asking
our advice." "I commend your brotherly affection," answered the emperor.
"Consult your sister, meet me to-morrow, and give me an answer."

The princes went home, but neglected to speak of their adventure in
meeting the emperor and hunting with him, and also of the honour he had
done them, yet did not the next morning fail to meet him at the place
appointed. "Well," said the emperor, "have you spoken to your sister,
and has she consented to the pleasure I expect of seeing you?" The two
princes looked at each other and blushed. "Sir," said Prince Bahman, "we
beg your majesty to excuse us, for both my brother and I forgot." "Then
remember to-day," replied the emperor, "and be sure to bring me an
answer to-morrow."

The princes were guilty of the same fault a second time, and the emperor
was so good-natured as to forgive their negligence; but to prevent their
forgetfulness the third time, he pulled three little golden balls out of
a purse, and put them into Prince Bahman's bosom. "These balls," said
he, smiling, "will prevent your forgetting a third time what I wish you
to do for my sake; since the noise they will make by falling on the
floor when you undress will remind you, if you do not recollect it
before." The event happened just as the emperor foresaw; and without
these balls the princes had not thought of speaking to their sister of
this affair, for as Prince Bahman unloosed his girdle to go to bed the
balls dropped on the floor, upon which he ran into Prince Perviz's
chamber, when both went into the Princess Periezade's apartment, and
after they had asked her pardon for coming at so unseasonable a time,
they told her all the circumstances of their meeting the emperor.

The princess was somewhat surprised at this intelligence. "Your meeting
with the emperor," said she, "is happy and honourable and may in the end
be highly advantageous to you, but it places me in an awkward position.
It was on my account, I know, you refused the emperor, and I am
infinitely obliged to you for doing so. I know by this that you would
rather be guilty of incivility toward the emperor than violate the union
we have sworn to each other. You judge right, for if you had once gone
you would insensibly have been engaged to devote yourselves to him. But
do you think it an easy matter absolutely to refuse the emperor what he
seems so earnestly to desire? Monarchs will be obeyed in their desires,
and it may be dangerous to oppose them; therefore, if to follow my
inclination I should dissuade you from obeying him, it may expose you to
his resentment, and may render myself and you miserable. These are my
sentiments; but before we conclude upon anything let us consult the
Talking Bird and hear what he says; he is penetrating, and has promised
his assistance in all difficulties."

The princess sent for the cage, and after she had related the
circumstances to the Bird in the presence of her brothers, asked him
what they should do in this perplexity. The Bird answered: "The princes,
your brothers, must conform to the emperor's pleasure, and in their turn
invite him to come and see your house."

"But, Bird," replied the princess, "my brothers and I love one another,
and our friendship is yet undisturbed. Will not this step be injurious
to that friendship?" "Not at all," replied the Bird; "it will tend
rather to cement it." "Then," answered the princess, "the emperor will
see me." The Bird told her it was necessary he should, and that
everything would go better afterward.

Next morning the princes met the emperor hunting, who asked them if they
had remembered to speak to their sister. Prince Bahman approached and
answered: "Sir, we are ready to obey you, for we have not only obtained
our sister's consent with great ease, but she took it amiss that we
should pay her that deference in a matter wherein our duty to your
majesty was concerned. If we have offended, we hope you will pardon
us." "Do not be uneasy," replied the emperor. "I highly approve of your
conduct, and hope you will have the same deference and attachment to my
person, if I have ever so little share in your friendship." The princes,
confounded at the emperor's goodness, returned no other answer but a low
obeisance.

The emperor, contrary to his usual custom, did not hunt long that day.
Presuming that the princes possessed wit equal to their courage and
bravery, he longed with impatience to converse with them more at
liberty. He made them ride on each side of him, an honour which was
envied by the grand vizier, who was much mortified to see them preferred
before him.

When the emperor entered his capital, the eyes of the people, who stood
in crowds in the streets, were fixed upon the two Princes Bahman and
Perviz; and they were earnest to know who they might be.

All, however, agreed in wishing that the emperor had been blessed with
two such handsome princes, and said that his children would have been
about the same age, if the queen had not been so unfortunate as to lose
them.

The first thing the emperor did when he arrived at his palace was to
conduct the princes into the principal apartments, who praised without
affectation the beauty and symmetry of the rooms, and the richness of
the furniture and ornaments. Afterward a magnificent repast was served
up, and the emperor made them sit with him, which they at first refused;
but finding it was his pleasure, they obeyed.

The emperor, who had himself much learning, particularly in history,
foresaw that the princes, out of modesty and respect, would not take the
liberty of beginning any conversation. Therefore, to give them an
opportunity, he furnished them with subjects all dinner-time. But
whatever subject he introduced, they shewed so much wit, judgment, and
discernment, that he was struck with admiration. "Were these my own
children," said he to himself, "and I had improved their talents by
suitable education, they could not have been more accomplished or better
informed." In short, he took such great pleasure in their conversation,
that, after having sat longer than usual, he led them into his closet,
where he pursued his conversation with them, and at last said: "I never
supposed that there were among my subjects in the country youths so well
brought up, so lively, so capable; and I never was better pleased with
any conversation than yours; but it is time now we should relax our
minds with some diversion; and as nothing is more capable of enlivening
the mind than music, you shall hear a vocal and instrumental concert
which may not be disagreeable to you."

The emperor had no sooner spoken than the musicians, who had orders to
attend, entered, and answered fully the expectations the princes had
been led to entertain of their abilities. After the concerts, an
excellent farce was acted, and the entertainment was concluded by
dancers of both sexes.

The two princes, seeing night approach, prostrated themselves at the
emperor's feet; and having first thanked him for the favours and honours
he had heaped upon them, asked his permission to retire; which was
granted by the emperor, who, in dismissing them, said: "I give you leave
to go; but remember, you will be always welcome, and the oftener you
come the greater pleasure you will do me."

Before they went out of the emperor's presence, Prince Bahman said:
"Sir, may we presume to request that your majesty will do us and our
sister the honour to pass by our house, and refresh yourself after your
fatigue, the first time you take the diversion of hunting in that
neighbourhood? It is not worthy of your presence; but monarchs sometimes
have vouchsafed to take shelter in a cottage." "My children," replied
the emperor, "your house cannot be otherwise than beautiful and worthy
of its owners. I will call and see it with pleasure, which will be the
greater for having for my hosts you and your sister, who is already dear
to me from the account you give me of the rare qualities with which she
is endowed: and this satisfaction I will defer no longer than to-morrow.
Early in the morning I will be at the place where I shall never forget
that I first saw you. Meet me, and you shall be my guides."

When the Princes Bahman and Perviz had returned home, they gave the
princess an account of the distinguished reception the emperor had given
them, and told her that they had invited him to do them the honour, as
he passed by, to call at their house, and that he had appointed the next
day.

"If it be so," replied the princess, "we must think of preparing a
repast fit for his majesty; and for that purpose I think it would be
proper we should consult the Talking Bird, who will tell us, perhaps,
what meats the emperor likes best." The princes approved of her plan,
and after they had retired she consulted the Bird alone. "Bird," said
she, "the emperor will do us the honour to-morrow to come and see our
house, and we are to entertain him; tell us what we shall do to acquit
ourselves to his satisfaction."

"Good mistress," replied the Bird, "you have excellent cooks, let them
do the best they can; but above all things, let them prepare a dish of
cucumbers stuffed full of pearls, which must be set before the emperor
in the first course before all the other dishes."

"Cucumbers stuffed full of pearls!" cried Princess Periezade with
amazement; "surely, Bird, you do not know what you say; it is an unheard
of dish. The emperor may admire it as a piece of magnificence, but he
will sit down to eat, and not to admire pearls; besides, all the pearls
I possess are not enough for such a dish."

"Mistress," said the Bird, "do what I say, and be not uneasy about what
may happen. Nothing but good will follow. As for the pearls, go early
to-morrow morning to the foot of the first tree on your right hand in
the park, dig under it, and you will find more than you want."

That night the princess ordered a gardener to be ready to attend her,
and the next morning early, led him to the tree which the Bird had told
her of, and bade him dig at its foot. When the gardener came to a
certain depth, he found some resistance to the spade, and presently
discovered a gold box about a foot square, which he showed the princess.
"This," said she, "is what I brought you for; take care not to injure it
with the spade."

When the gardener took up the box, he gave it into the princess's hands,
who, as it was only fastened with neat little hasps, soon opened it, and
found it full of pearls of a moderate size, but equal and fit for the
use that was to be made of them. Very well satisfied with having found
this treasure, after she had shut the box again, she put it under her
arm and went back to the house, while the gardener threw the earth into
the hole at the foot of the tree as it had been before.

The Princes Bahman and Perviz, who, as they were dressing themselves in
their own apartments, saw their sister in the garden earlier than usual,
as soon as they could get out went to her, and met her as she was
returning with a gold box under her arm, which much surprised them.
"Sister," said Bahman, "you carried nothing with you when we saw you
before with the gardener, and now we see you have a golden box; is this
some treasure found by the gardener, and did he come and tell you of
it?"

"No, brother," answered the princess, "I took the gardener to the place
where this casket was concealed, and showed him where to dig; but you
will be more amazed when you see what it contains."

The princess opened the box, and when the princes saw that it was full
of pearls, which, though small, were of great value, they asked her how
she came to the knowledge of this treasure. "Brothers," said she, "come
with me and I will tell you." The princess, as they returned to the
house, gave them an account of her having consulted the Bird, as they
had agreed she should, and the answer he had given her; the objection
she had raised to preparing a dish of cucumbers stuffed full of pearls,
and how he had told her where to find this box. The sister and brothers
formed many conjectures to penetrate into what the Bird could mean by
ordering them to prepare such a dish; but after much conversation, they
agreed to follow his advice exactly.

As soon as the princess entered the house, she called for the head cook;
and after she had given him directions about the entertainment for the
emperor, said to him: "Besides all this, you must dress an extraordinary
dish for the emperor's own eating, which nobody else must have anything
to do with besides yourself. This dish must be of cucumbers stuffed with
these pearls;" and at the same time she opened him the box, and showed
him the jewels.

The chief cook, who had never heard of such a dish, started back, and
showed his thoughts by his looks; which the princess penetrating, said:
"I see you take me to be mad to order such a dish, which one may say
with certainty was never made. I know this as well as you; but I am not
mad, and give you these orders with the most perfect recollection. You
must invent and do the best you can, and bring me back what pearls are
left." The cook could make no reply, but took the box and retired; and
afterward the princess gave directions to all the domestics to have
everything in order, both in the house and gardens, to receive the
emperor.

Next day the two princes went to the place appointed, and as soon as the
emperor of Persia arrived the chase began and lasted till the heat of
the sun obliged him to leave off. While Prince Bahman stayed to conduct
the emperor to their house, Prince Perviz rode before to show the way,
and when he came in sight of the house, spurred his horse, to inform the
princess that the emperor was approaching; but she had been told by some
servants whom she had placed to give notice, and the prince found her
waiting ready to receive him.

When the emperor had entered the court-yard and alighted at the portico,
the princess came and threw herself at his feet, and the two princes
informed him she was their sister, and besought him to accept her
respects.

The emperor stooped to raise her, and after he had gazed some time on
her beauty, struck with her fine person and dignified air, he said: "The
brothers are worthy of the sister, and she worthy of them; since, if I
may judge of her understanding by her person, I am not amazed that the
brothers would do nothing without their sister's consent; but," added
he, "I hope to be better acquainted with you, my daughter, after I have
seen the house."

"Sir," said the princess, "it is only a plain country residence, fit for
such people as we are, who live retired from the great world. It is not
to be compared with the magnificent palaces of emperors." "I cannot
perfectly agree with you in opinion," said the emperor very obligingly,
"for its first appearance makes me suspect you; however, I will not pass
my judgment upon it till I have seen it all; therefore be pleased to
conduct me through the apartments."

The princess led the emperor through all the rooms except the hall; and,
after he had considered them very attentively, and admired their
variety, "My daughter," said he to the princess, "do you call this a
country house? The finest and largest cities would soon be deserted if
all country houses were like yours. I am no longer surprised that you
despise the town. Now let me see the garden, which I doubt not is
answerable to the house."

The princess opened a door which led into the garden, and the first
object which presented itself to the emperor's view was the golden
fountain. Surprised at so rare an object, he asked from whence that
wonderful water, which gave so much pleasure to behold, had been
procured; where was its source, and by what art it was made to play so
high. He said he would presently take a nearer view of it.

The princess then led him to the spot where the harmonious tree was
planted; and there the emperor heard a concert, different from all he
had ever heard before; and stopping to see where the musicians were, he
could discern nobody far or near, but still distinctly heard the music
which ravished his senses. "My daughter," said he to the princess,
"where are the musicians whom I hear? Are they under ground, or
invisible in the air? Such excellent performers will hazard nothing by
being seen; on the contrary, they would please the more."

"Sir," answered the princess, smiling, "they are not musicians, but the
leaves of the tree your majesty sees before you, which form this
concert; and if you will give yourself the trouble to go a little
nearer, you will be convinced, and the voices will be the more
distinct."

The emperor went nearer and was so charmed with the sweet harmony that
he would never have been tired with hearing it, but that his desire to
have a nearer view of the fountain of golden water forced him away.
"Daughter," said he, "tell me, I pray you, whether this wonderful tree
was found in your garden by chance, or was a present made to you, or
have you procured it from some foreign country? It must certainly have
come from a great distance, otherwise curious as I am after natural
rarities I should have heard of it. What name do you call it by?"

"Sir," replied the princess, "this tree has no other name than that of
the Singing Tree, and is not a native of this country. It would at
present take up too much time to tell your majesty by what adventures it
came here; its history is connected with the Golden Water and the
Talking Bird, which came to me at the same time, and which your majesty
may presently see. But if it be agreeable to your majesty, after you
have rested yourself and recovered the fatigue of hunting, which must be
the greater because of the sun's intense heat, I will do myself the
honour of relating it to you."

"My daughter," replied the emperor, "my fatigue is so well recompensed
by the wonderful things you have shown me, that I do not feel it in the
least. Let me see the Golden Water, for I am impatient to see and admire
afterward the Talking Bird."

When the emperor came to the Golden Water, his eyes were fixed so
steadfastly upon the fountain, that he could not take them off. At last,
addressing himself to the princess, he said: "As you tell me, daughter,
that this water has no spring or communication, I conclude that it is
foreign, as well as the Singing Tree."

"Sir," replied the princess, "it is as your majesty conjectures; and to
let you know that this water has no communication with any spring, I
must inform you that the basin is one entire stone, so that the water
cannot come in at the sides or underneath. But what your majesty will
think most wonderful is that all this water proceeded but from one small
flagon, emptied into this basin, which increased to the quantity you
see, by a property peculiar to itself, and formed this fountain."
"Well," said the emperor, going from the fountain, "this is enough for
one time. I promise myself the pleasure to come and visit it often; but
now let us go and see the Talking Bird."

As he went toward the hall, the emperor perceived a prodigious number of
singing birds in the trees around, filling the air with their songs and
warblings, and asked why there were so many there and none on the other
trees in the garden. "The reason, sir," answered the princess, "is
because they come from all parts to accompany the song of the Talking
Bird, which your majesty may see in a cage in one of the windows of the
hall we are approaching; and if you attend, you will perceive that his
notes are sweeter than those of any of the other birds, even the
nightingale's."

The emperor went into the hall; and as the Bird continued singing, the
princess raised her voice, and said, "My slave, here is the emperor, pay
your compliments to him." The Bird left off singing that instant, when
all the other birds ceased also, and said: "The emperor is welcome; God
prosper him and prolong his life!" As the entertainment was served on
the sofa near the window where the Bird was placed, the sultan replied,
as he was taking his seat: "Bird, I thank you, and am overjoyed to find
in you the sultan and king of birds."

As soon as the emperor saw the dish of cucumbers set before him,
thinking they were prepared in the best manner, he reached out his hand
and took one; but when he cut it, was in extreme surprise to find it
stuffed with pearls. "What novelty is this?" said he; "and with what
design were these cucumbers stuffed thus with pearls, since pearls are
not to be eaten?" He looked at his hosts to ask them the meaning when
the Bird interrupting him, said: "Can your majesty be in such great
astonishment at cucumbers stuffed with pearls, which you see with your
own eyes, and yet so easily believe that the queen, your wife, gave
birth to a dog, a cat, and a piece of wood?" "I believed those things,"
replied the emperor, "because the attendants assured me of the facts."
"Those attendants, sir," replied the Bird, "were the queen's two
sisters, who, envious of her happiness in being preferred by your
majesty before them, to satisfy their envy and revenge, have abused your
majesty's credulity. If you interrogate them, they will confess their
crime. The two brothers and the sister whom you see before you are your
own children, whom they exposed, and who were taken in by the intendant
of your gardens, who provided nurses for them, and took care of their
education."

This speech presently cleared up the emperor's understanding. "Bird,"
cried he, "I believe the truth which you discover to me. The inclination
which drew me to them told me plainly they must be of my own blood. Come
then, my sons, come, my daughter, let me embrace you, and give you the
first marks of a father's love and tenderness." The emperor then rose,
and after having embraced the two princes and the princess, and mingled
his tears with theirs, said: "It is not enough, my children; you must
embrace each other, not as the children of the intendant of my gardens,
to whom I have been so much obliged for preserving your lives, but as my
own children, of the royal blood of the monarchs of Persia, whose
glory, I am persuaded you will maintain."

After the two princes and princess had embraced mutually with new
satisfaction, the emperor sat down again with them, and finished his
meal in haste; and when he had done, said: "My children, you see in me
your father; to-morrow I will bring the queen, your mother, therefore
prepare to receive her."

The emperor afterward mounted his horse, and returned with expedition to
his capitol. The first thing he did, as soon as he had alighted and
entered his palace, was to command the grand vizier to seize the queen's
two sisters. They were taken from their houses separately, convicted,
and condemned to death; which sentence was put in execution within an
hour.

In the meantime, the Emperor Kosrouschah, followed by all the lords of
his court who were then present, went on foot to the door of the great
mosque; and after he had taken the queen out of the strict confinement
she had languished under for so many years, embracing her in the
miserable condition to which she was then reduced, said to her with
tears in his eyes: "I come to entreat your pardon for the injustice I
have done you, and to make you the reparation I ought; which I have
begun, by punishing the unnatural wretches who put the abominable cheat
upon me; and I hope you will look upon it as complete, when I present to
you two accomplished princes and a lovely princess, our children. Come
and resume your former rank, with all the honours which are your due."
All this was done and said before great crowds of people who flocked
from all parts at the first news of what was passing, and immediately
spread the joyful intelligence through the city.

Next morning early the emperor and queen, whose mournful humiliating
dress was changed for magnificent robes, went with all their court to
the house built by the intendant of the gardens, where the emperor
presented the Princes Bahman and Perviz, and the Princess Periezade to
their enraptured mother. "These, much injured wife," said he, "are the
two princes your sons, and the princess your daughter; embrace them with
the same tenderness I have done, since they are worthy both of me and
you." The tears flowed plentifully down their cheeks at these tender
embraces, especially the queen's, from the comfort and joy of having two
such princes for her sons, and such a princess for her daughter, on
whose account she had so long endured the severest afflictions.

The two princes and the princess had prepared a magnificent repast for
the emperor and queen and their court. As soon as that was over, the
emperor led the queen into the garden, and shewed her the Harmonious
Tree and the beautiful effect of the Golden Fountain. She had seen the
Bird in his cage, and the emperor had spared no panegyric in his praise
during the repast.

When there was nothing to detain the emperor any longer, he took horse,
and with the Princes Bahman and Perviz on his right hand, and the queen
consort and the princess at his left, preceded and followed by all the
officers of his court, according to their rank, returned to his capital.
Crowds of people came out to meet them, and with acclamations of joy
ushered them into the city, where all eyes were fixed not only upon the
queen, and her royal children, but also upon the Bird, which the
princess carried before her in his cage, admiring his sweet notes, which
had drawn all the other birds about him, and followed him flying from
tree to tree in the country, and from one house top to another in the
city. The Princes Bahman and Perviz and the Princess Periezade were at
length brought to the palace with pomp, and nothing was to be seen or
heard all that night but illuminations and rejoicings both in the palace
and in the utmost parts of the city, which lasted many days, and were
continued throughout the empire of Persia, as intelligence of the joyful
event reached the several provinces.




THE STORY OF THE FISHERMAN AND THE GENIE


There was once an aged fisherman who was so poor that he could scarcely
earn as much as would maintain himself, his wife, and three children. He
went every day to fish betimes in the morning, and imposed it as a law
upon himself not to cast his nets above four times a day. He went one
morning by moonlight, and coming to the seaside, undressed himself, and
cast in his nets. As he drew them toward the shore, he found them very
heavy, and thought he had a good draught of fish, at which he rejoiced;
but a moment after, perceiving that instead of fish his net contained
nothing but the carcass of an ass, he was much vexed.

When he had mended his nets, which the carcass of the ass had broken in
several places, he threw them in a second time; and when he drew them,
found a great deal of resistance, which made him think he had taken
abundance of fish; but he found nothing except a basket full of gravel
and slime, which grieved him extremely. "O Fortune!" cried he, with a
lamentable tone, "be not angry with me, nor persecute a wretch who prays
thee to spare him. I came hither from my house to seek for my
livelihood, and thou pronouncest against me a sentence of death. I have
no other trade but this to subsist by, and, notwithstanding all my care,
I can scarcely provide what is necessary for my family. But I am to
blame to complain of thee; thou takest pleasure to persecute honest
people, and advancest those who have no virtue to recommend them."

Having finished this complaint, he fretfully threw away the basket, and,
washing his nets from the slime, cast them a third time, but brought up
nothing except stones, shells, and mud. No language can express his
disappointment; he was almost distracted. However, when day began to
appear, he did not forget to say his prayers like a good Mussulman, and
he added to them this petition: "Lord, thou knowest that I cast my nets
only four times a day; I have already drawn them three times, without
the least reward for my labour: I am only to cast them once more; I pray
thee to render the sea favourable to me, as thou didst to Moses."

The fisherman, having finished this prayer, cast his nets the fourth
time; and when he thought it was proper, drew them as formerly with
great difficulty; but instead of fish found nothing in them but a vessel
of yellow copper, which, from its weight, seemed not to be empty; and he
observed that it was fastened and closed with lead, having the
impression of a seal upon it. This turn of fortune rejoiced him: "I will
sell it," said he, "to the founder, and with the money buy a measure of
corn." He examined the vessel on all sides, and shook it to see if its
contents made any noise, but heard nothing. This circumstance, with the
impression of the seal upon the cover, made him think it enclosed
something precious. To try this, he took a knife and opened it with very
little labour. He turned the mouth downward, but nothing came out, which
surprised him extremely. He placed it before him, but while he viewed it
attentively, there burst forth a very thick smoke, which obliged him to
retire two or three paces back.

The smoke ascended to the clouds, and, extending itself along the sea
and upon the shore, formed a great mist, which filled the fisherman
with astonishment. When the smoke was all out of the vessel, it
reunited, and became a solid body, of which was formed a genie twice as
high as the greatest of giants. At the sight of such a monster the
fisherman would fain have fled, but was so frightened that he could not
move.

"Solomon," cried the genie immediately, "Solomon, the great prophet,
pardon, pardon; I will never more oppose your will, I will obey all your
commands."

The fisherman, when he heard these words of the genie, recovered his
courage and said to him: "Thou proud spirit, what is it you say? It is
above eighteen hundred years since the prophet Solomon died, and we are
now at the end of time. Tell me your history, and how you came to be
shut up in this vessel."

The genie, turning to the fisherman with a fierce look, said: "Thou must
address me with more courtesy; thou art a presumptuous fellow to call me
a proud spirit; speak to me more respectfully, or I will kill thee."
"Ah!" replied the fisherman, "why should you kill me? Did I not just now
set you at liberty, and have you already forgotten my services?"

"No, I remember it," said the genie, "but that shall not save thy life:
I have only one favour to grant thee." "And what is that?" asked the
fisherman. "It is," answered the genie, "to give thee thy choice in what
manner thou wouldst have me put thee to death." "But wherein have I
offended you?" demanded the fisherman. "Is that your reward for the
service I have rendered you?" "I cannot treat thee otherwise," said the
genie; "and that thou mayest know the reason, hearken to my story."

"I am one of those rebellious spirits that opposed the will of Solomon,
the son of David, and to avenge himself, that monarch sent Asaph, the
son of Barakhia, his chief minister, to apprehend me. Asaph seized
my person, and brought me by force before his master's throne.

"Solomon commanded me to acknowledge his power, and to submit to his
commands. I bravely refused, and told him I would rather expose myself
to his resentment, than swear fealty as he required. To punish me, he
shut me up in this copper vessel; and that I might not break my prison,
he himself stamped upon this leaden cover his seal with the great name
of God engraven upon it. He then gave the vessel to one of the genies
who had submitted, with orders to throw me into the sea.

"During the first hundred years of my imprisonment, I swore that if any
one should deliver me before the expiration of that period, I would make
him rich, even after his death; but that century ran out, and nobody did
me the good office. During the second, I made an oath that I would open
all the treasures of the earth to any one that might set me at liberty;
but with no better success. In the third, I promised to make my
deliverer a potent monarch, and to grant him every day three requests,
of what nature soever they might be; but this century passed as well as
the two former, and I continued in prison. At last, being angry to find
myself a prisoner so long, I swore that if afterward any one should
deliver me, I would kill him without mercy, and grant him no favour but
to choose the manner of his death; and, therefore, since thou hast
delivered me to-day, I give thee that choice."

[Illustration]

_The smoke ascended to the clouds, and extending itself along the sea
and upon the shore formed a great mist._

